LOOK TO THE STARS

    Volume I


            By
Alice Isom Gubler Stratton

          Volumes I & II of my life's story, "Look to
the Stars," is affectionately dedicated to my children.
They are the golden link between the rich heritage of my
past, and the bright hope of the future.  My love for
them is boundless.  May they always see the beauties of
this creation, and may their rejoicings ascend to Heaven.


                All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form with-
out permission in writing from the author or her trustees<

         CONTENTS

             Volume I

              Title
Introduction
Adcnowl edgments
Heaven Meets Earth
The House That Papa Built
Papa's Feminine World (1915)
Man Made Marvels (1916)
Big Things Happen (1917)
Armistice (1918)
Papa's Point of View (1919)
In Which We Get Another Brother (1920)
Patriarchal Blessing (1921)
Papa Has Another Son (1922)
Annie Comes Home (1923)
Oak Creek
Goodbye Grandma (1924)
If Birds Can Fly, Why Can't I? (1925)
Wedding Bells (1926)
More Wedding Bells (1927)
Daughter, Beware (1928)
College (1929)
So Turns the Tide (1930)
Sing a Song of Sixpence (1931)
The Call of the Canyon (1932)
The New Deal (1933)
Marilyn (1934)
Donkey Shelves (1935)
Norman (1936)
Little Rock Schoolhouse, Goodbye (1937)
"I Want to go Wif You" (1938)
DeMar (1939)
A Really, Really Birthday (1940)
Shirley (1941)
War Boom (1942)
Gordon (1943)
Summer (1944)
Terry (1945)
We Can't Eat Flowers (1946)
Lolene (1947)
Clouds on the Horizon (1948)
So Long for Awhile (1949)
Politics (1950)
County Treasurer (1951)
Grandma?  who?  Me?  (1952)
A Fledgling on the Edge of the Nest (1953)
The Fledgling Tries His Wings (1954)
The Mesa (1955)
Goodbye for now. Papa (1956)
Another Fledgling Leaves the Nest (1957)
Arkie Annie (1958)

                Title
A Diamond for Graduation (1959)
Gordon's Mission Call (1960)
Perry Joins the dan (1961)
Crossroads (1962)
Yakima (1963)
Deer Park (1964)
Bade to Utah (1965)
Home, Sweet Home (1966)

            VOLUME II
Title Page
Introduction
Ermal Stratton (1967)
Occupation, Housewofe (1968)
The 50/50 Farmer (1969)
Western States Mission (1970-71)
Rattlesnake (1972)
Dear Little Grandson, Goodbye (1973)
Tornado Ahoy! (1974)
The Gatcho Rancho (1975)
Bicentennial (1976)
The Van (1977)
A New Revelation (1978)
Motorcycles and Trains (1979)
Signs of the Times (1980)
Mama's Centennial (1981)
The Diggers Are Coming, A-ho, A-ho (1982)
Onegal (1983)

       LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
My birthplace and baby days        8-A  &
Childhood home and family           114-A &
Winferd's  boyhood home & family    114-C &
Winferd's and Alice's children      260-A &
Career Days                         390-A &
The Northwest and bade to Utah      462-A &
My posterity                       782-A to
Ermal's posterity                   786-A to
Journey's end                        796-A &
Sources of Information
Index of people in my story         II thru
-1-


                           INTRODUCTION

     The little barefoot boy pattered down the street in Rockville.  There on
the sidewalk was a nickel.  Excitedly he picked it up.  Further on he found a
dime, and then another.  Holding the coins in his hand he marveled.  Such a lot
of money!  Walking ahead of him was a stranger.

      "Hey mister," the boy called, racing to catch him. The man turned as the
boy thrust the coins at him.  "Do you have a hole in your pocket?  I found these
on the sidewalk behind you."

     The man put his hand in his pocket.  Sure enough there was a hole.  Scrutin-
izing the lad, the man asked "Are you William Crawford's little boy"?"

     "No.  I am Raymond DeMille," came the reply.

     "I thought you must be William's son.  I didn't know there was anyone left
on the earth as honest as he is."

     Bishop Raymond DeMill related this incident to me.  "Your grandfather,
William Crawford had the reputation of being the most honest man alive.  When
he was bishop of Springdale, and people turned their skinny cattle in for tith-
ing, your grandfather gave his own fat cattle to the church, and kept the
skinny ones to fatten up.  That's the kind of man he was."

     And that's the kind of people my forebearers were.  They recognized the
truth when they heard it, and accepted the gospel.  My great-great grandfather
Alpheus Gifford baptized Heber C. Kimball, grandfather of Spencer W. Kimball.
In a letter, dated September 3, 1975, President Kimball has written:
TO THE MEMBERS OF THE GIFFORD FAMILY
Dear Friends:

     As one who is very grateful, may I express the gratitude of the Kimball
family that your ancestor, Alpheus Gifford, was so responsible for bringing
our ancestor into the Church.

     I believe in family reunions and believe that much good can be accomplished
by the association of family members to recount the stories of the family and
keep them fresh in the memory of the people of the family.

     I hope also that the members of your family will keep records of their own
lives and the lives of their family members.  Such biographies and autobiograph-
ies become very precious as time goes on and generations succeed each other.

     Please accept my best wishes, and may I express appreciation for the other
members of the Kimball family and also for the Church for your faithfulness and
devotion and loyalty.

     With kindest wishes,

                                        Faithfully yours,

                                        Spencer W. Kimball

                                        President

     Heber C. Kimball returned the favor many times over.  He baptized our grand-
parents John Parker Sr. and John Parker Jr. and Ellen Briggs when he took the
gospel to England.

                                        -2-

     Great-grandfather Freebom DeMill was baptized by Hyrum Smith and confirmed
by Joseph Smith Jr. at Colesville, Broome County, New York.

     Our people came from England, Canada, New York and Illinois, joining the
pioneer trek to the Great Salt Lake Valley.  From there, Brigham Young sent them
on to colonize towns further south.  They lived in dugouts and wagon boxes, and
ate pigweeds, cane seed and wild berries at first.  They became bishops, patri-
archs and auxilliary heads in their wards, part of them living in the United
Order.

     Our father, George Isom, grew up in Virgin, Utah, going on horseback "up
the river" to Oak Creek selling encyclopedia sets.  That's where he met our
mother, Annie Crawford, the sixth child of William and Camelia Crawford's family
of thirteen children.

     According to Aunt Fanny, Papa had to court mama in the living room where the
family was.  Fanny was mischevious.  She hid behind the kitchen door, where Rapa
attempted to kiss Mama goodnight.  She poked a comb through the crack just before
their lips met, and they kissed the comb.


                             Adcnowl edgments

     I express my appreciation to my daughter Lolene Gifford for the many
hours of proofreading and careful checking of my manuscript, and to my grand-
daughter Laura Gubler, who came as a lifesaver at the conclusion of the book
to do the technical job of indexing, and to my granddaughter Marie Gubler who
read for me when eye troubles beset me. Special thanks goes to my husband
Ennal, whose patience was tried to the limit with my endless typing, but who
endured with good humor.  I appreciate my children and grandchildren who have
cheered me on, encouraging me to finish this work.  I appreciate my sisters
who have helped recall the scenes of my childhood, especially Kate for her
work of art in illustrating the place where I was born.
-3-


                                   CHAPTER I

                               HEAVEN MEETS EARTH

      While I was still in Heaven, my cousins lantha and lanthus Campbell were

 born.  Aunt Mary and Uncle Lew already had five girls and lantha made six.  But

 lanthus was a boy!  It's easy to guess how tickled Uncle Lew was about that

 The twins arrived on August 10, 1909.

      Mama and Papa had had four little girls, but my sister Josephine only stayed

 a little while, then returned to Heaven.  That left Annie, who was six and one-

 half, Kate, not quite five and the toddler, baby Mildred.  Annie decided to ask

 the Heavenly Father to send twins to our family too.  Kate also prayed for twins

 for awhile, then she decided Mama had enough girls, so she just asked for a

 little brother.  Annie persisted in asking for twins.  For eleven months she

 prayed.  She has written:

      "Finally our prayers were answered!  One night in mid July of 1910 when we

 went to bed, we said our prayers as usual,and when we awoke in the morning,the

 miracle had happened!  Grandma was holding a tiny baby boy in her arms and there

 in the bed with my mother was a tiny baby girl.  How wonderful!  Words cannot

 express our joy.  The Lord had answered our prayers by sending the desire of our

 hearts.  Twins!  We named them George and Alice for our grandparents.  How we

 loved them!" '

    _ We arrived on July 17, 1910,on Aunt Ellen Spendlove's birthday, and on the

 anniversary of the landing of Noah's Ark.  (Genesis 8:4)   We were bom in a

 little lumber shack at the sawmill on Kolob.  Grandma Isom was the doctor and

 tne nurse.

 w.. J^T^? t0 an old chinese tradition. ^ the first food a child ever tasted

 and scraldTl^?6 ^ would become a fine sin^er•  s0 Grandma ba^ an apple

 and scraped a little of it onto each of our tongues.  I have no idea what my

 voice would have sounded like if it hadn't been for that.

 ^    My parents had been homesteading on Kolob since 1908, returning to Virain

 in the winter time.  Recorded in Mama's Memoirs is the following:  "In 1911 we

 closed up the old home at Virgin and came direct from the mountain to Hurricane

 where we had built a 12 X 14 grainery. but the babies took sick and bein^so    '

 coufd^v^h  ^ ^lce and willialn SPendlove t0^ us to their home where we

 cou1 dglvet hem, better care- ... A week after we moved to Spendloves, George
no^h f-^   T0" ? the bowels and was buried amid one of t^ "ost ^erSbS
^Pt^ose'^di^he^ur1^  severe for anyone t0 g0 t0 the ——————d
the banks^a^ Canal froze over.  Water, rzmning over the ice, spilled down
1-    ^st??    g   ! sheets.   Mama stayed with me, for I was not expected to
live.  My sisters wept.  Annie remembers lying on the family bedrolls in Aunt
br'eS IsTh'ave'been grea?9 bitterlY-  she could not be COJOrted-  ^als ^-

     Is it possible that I remember my twin brother?  It sp^ma iii^o T ^   -r
mind is a picture of another baby siting with me^n Papa^Tap  while he sano1"!
W^both'wore";1^ th^ ^ "A chicken went t0 bed wi^ the ^co^ng cougn"9
^ou-^Tfe: anTi6 hZTg^to^ve^de^^^^^ of my brother Ge0-
•Story "Double Blessing" published in the May, 1978 Friend.

                                       -4-

      The first five years of my life were my dominant ones.  Kolob was Heaven to

 me.  As soon as my sisters were out of school each spring we prepared to return

 to the ranch.  The bustling of cooking and packing was a joyous time to me.  I

 was surprised to leam years later, that the business of moving a family back

 and forth was just plain hard work for Mama.

      We always camped at Sanders's Ranch on our way and one of Uncle Ren Spend-

 love's boys, either Whit, lanthus or Cliff came along to help with the team.

 I loved camping out.  I reveled in the smell and the squeak of harness leather

 and the clinking of buckles and the sounds of the wagon as it sighed and re-

 laxed, cooling off in the night.  Stretched out on the family bed spread on the

 ground, I listened to the horses munching grain in their nose bags, the gentle

 crackle of the dying campfire, and the stars, the millions of singing stars!

      "Mama," I asked,"are all of the stars whirling?  Is that what makes them
sing?"

     Mama listened thoughtfully, then she said,"No, the music you hear is made
by the crickets and katydids and night birds in the bushes and trees, and by
the water in the creek tumbling over pebbles."

     I listened again and realized that the chirping and twittering and gurgling
really was ascending ug ^ instead of down from the stars.

     Carlyle once said, "Give us, 0 give us the man who sings at his work ....
The very stars are said to make harmony as they revolve in their spheres."
The Prophet Job was informed that while the foundations of this earth were beinc
laid "the morning stars sang together."

     Well, the last morning star had scarcely faded when we broke camp and were
on our way again.  We had a long hill to climb before the sun got too hot for
the^horses.  At Lamb Springs we ate breakfast and let the horses rest before
their long hard pull through the sand.

     We had to walk to lighten the load.  I bawled because the sand burned my
feet, still I pulled my coat around me.

     "You're a ridiculous child," Mama remarked.

    _"But the wind is cold," I complained, then added,"if the trees would stop
fanning then the wind could quit."

     "The trees don't fan the wind," Mama explained, "the wind fans the trees."

    "What a backwards situation'; I thought.

     With the deep sand behind us, back in the wagon we rode up around the
cinder knoll and on past Mulligan's Point, to Maloney's Ranch and then to the
Slick Rocks.

     The Slick Rocks was the terrible test to the stubbornness of teamsters and
the agonizing willingness of horse flesh.  We gladly piled out of the wagon
here.  Vivid in my mind is the picture of Papa slapping the reins, on the
horses' backs and yelling,"Git up Mag!  Git up Dick!"  Iron wagon tires scree-
ched over steep red sandstone, horses strained muscle and sinew, pulling, pull-
ing, leaning forward until they went to their knees.  Terrified,! watched.
Mag's and Dick's eyes glared wildly, their ears laid back.  Sometimes the wagon
started to slip back and Papa cracked the whip and yelled louder.  The wagon
could roll over the ledge on the right and all would be lost.  With Papa's yell-
ing and urging, the stout-hearted team made it over the bad spot, where breath-
ing hard and their hides shining with sweat, they stopped to rest before going
on to the summit.  The terror was over.

                                       -5-

      We had made our safe return to Paradise, Kolob.  My childhood Kolob was

 bluebells, wild roses and sego lillies.  It was sandstone that could be rubbed

 into the shape of dolls, and pine bark, thick and soft for Cliff Spendlove to

 carve into toy horses.  It was pollywogs in clear pools in the willows and water

 snakes that left narrow roads through  our dugout playhouses in the sand banks.

 It was games in the 'twilight, scurrying through the soft sand and across the

 meadow calling,"barey ain't out today" while imagining the bear was crouching

 at the edge of the meadow behind the dark trees, ready to pounce upon us as we

 dashed into the house.  It was the smell of pine and sage and oak, the cackle

 of the sage hen, the flicker of the bluebird and the hammering of the jay.  It

 was the sight of Rube and Jody Maloney's sheep wagon with its bucket of sour-

 dough hanging on the side, dough dripping down the wheels.  It was the cheese

 house, cool and inviting where squirrels played tag through the rafters.  It

 was the little brown wren that nested under the eaves. It was the crack of

 lightning  and the clap of thunder and pine trees falling in a pillar of fire.

 It was the howl of the coyote.  It was water rising in the damp sand where the

 shovel sought a water hole.  It was Old Tiny, the dog, barking down the trail,

 bringing the last stray calf in at milking time.  It was new milk guzzled from

 a tin cup at the corral gate, making a thick foam moustache across my upper lip.

 It was tall cool ferns packed around sweet pounds of butter ready to be sent to

 the store at Virgin.  It was hot corn bread drenched with fresh butter at supper

 time, and the smell of lamp light on an oil cloth covered table.  It was little

 new potatoes scrabbled from under the vine and sweet garden peas and juicy

 turnips.  It was Paradise!

      We moved from "Milwaukie," the sawmill canyon, to "Pinevalley", a mile or

 so on top, but we often hiked back.  We would take a picnic and spend the day,

 where we gathered iron ore rocks eroded in the shape of peanuts, marbles and

 little dishes.

      Ellsha Lee's family came to celebrate one 4th of July with us.  Papa put
the alphogieson the saddle horse, with Edith in one leather pouch and I in the
other.  We rode around the mountain to the ice cave, where he filled the alphog-
ies with ice.  Edith and I rode back home in front of and behind the saddle with
Papa.  Mama made ice cream in gallon buckets that were set inside galvanized
water buckets packed with ice and salt.  The ice cream was turned back and forth
by the bail.  Every little while the lid was pried off the gallon bucket and the
frozen cream scraped down from the sides with a knife, a drooling operation
There is nothing in all the world that compares with the ambrosia that came from
that bucket.

     Mama had a special No. 2 tub that she kept sterilized  and shining for
cheese making.  The dairy thermometer, bobbing in the tub full of milk, fascin-
ated me.  I watched her stir in the rennet when the temperature was right  and
with a long, thin bladed knife, cut the curd as it set, yellow puddles of whey
separating as the curds became more solid.  Hungrily we hung around.  We loved
curd, from the first soft white ones to the final squeaky yellow ones after the
whey was drained and the coloring and salt added.  Probably none of the cheese
would have reached the press if Mama had doled out    as much of it as we wanted.
Still she was generous.

     The cheese molds were made of pine slats held together with hoops.  The press
was a log,outside  on the shady side of the house, rigged up for a lever.  Mama
lined the molds with cheesecloth and the sweet curd was packed inside and put under
the press. We were eagerly on hand when she unmolded the cheese, for the pressure had
*Alphogies are leather pouches big enough to hold a child, that hang on each side
of a pack horse.

                                        -6-

 squeezed tantalizing little ruffles of it up around the edges of the mould.

 Patiently we waited as Mama trimmed these off, for we knew she would divide the

 "trimmings" among us.  Next she rubbed the yellow discs of cheese with butter

 smoothing and sealing the goodness in, then set them on the swinging shelf in'

 the cheese house behind our cabin to cure.

      Mama sometimes sent me to the sand wash with a little lard bucket to fetch

 water.  We never wore shoes in the summertime and the sand often burned our feet.

 Once it was so hot that I cried.  Mildred took her bucket and ran back and forth

 to the wash, burning her own bare feet to make a puddle path for me.  I carried

 my bucket of water all the way to the house on the wet patches she had made

 while she ran back to refill her bucket.

      One sad little task was helping Papa take small animals from his traps while

 he held the steel jaws open with his foot.  His hands were too crippled to set

 the traps, so that was our job too, while he supervised.  I grieved for the wood-

 chucks and gophers and other animals.

      Uncle Ren Spendlove's boys took turns helping us.  When they came from Hurr-

 icane they brought fresh fruit.  During those years I never saw fruit that wasn't

 bruised from a rough wagon ride.  I thought peaches and apples had to be bruised

 to be good.  These were squashed, brown, oozy and delicious.

      The big pine tree where our chicken coop was anchored was struck by lighten-

 ing one night, which electrocuted our entire flock of chickens as they slept with

 their heads under their wings.

      The only toys we knew were those we made.  Our doll houses were dug into the

 sandbank with a spoon and decorated with lacy, sweet smelling Jerusalem Oak.  The

 dolls were made of flowers with heads of the shiny black berries from the deadly

 night shade.  Our wagons were the bleached vertebrae of bones of animals found

 in the sand.  Our miniature world was imaginative and happy.

      I was five when the folks stopped going to the ranch.  I was the one who

 closed-the gate for the last time behind the wagon.  In my hand I had a few tiny

 new potatoes the size of peas and one little golden cheese that had been pressed

 in a salt shaker lid.  These small rations belonged to my rag doll family.  I

 set them down at the foot of the big yellow pine that the gate was hinged on.
After closing the gate, I climbed into the wagon.  We were miles down the road
before I remembered them.  I felt badly.  Two years later-when I went to Kolob
with Aunt Ellen's family I looked, but there was no sign of them.

     %at was my last trip to Kolob as a child.  All that remained to me were
cherished memories.  We used to climb the Hurricane hill often, my sisters and
I, but we never turned around until we could see the white Kolob peaks and the
Steamboat mountain.  That was the goal of every hike.

     My love for our Heavenly Father began at Kolob.  I remember kneeling at
Mama s knee as she helped me with my prayer.  I felt warm and secure, knowing
that even in the dark the Heavenly Father watched over me.  This realization
took the eeriness out of the shadows that moved outside the tent, and gave un-
derstanding to the noises of the night.  Pine needles falling on canvas had the
same lightness as the scampering of squirrel feet and the occasional thump of a
falling cone sounded friendly as it rolled off the tent to the ground.

     One day Mama let my sisters and me hike down to the sawmill canyon alone.
We became so engrossed in gathering fancy rocks and wild flowers that time
slipped away.  The sun was settling into the grove to the west as we trudged

                                        -7-
through sand and sage on the last stretch home.

     With our arms full of treasures, we raced to the house to show Mama.  The
tantalizing smell of hot combread greeted us, for it was supper time.  But the
room was strangely empty.  Mama was not there.  I shot out the back door.  Run-
ning to the tent where our beds were, I lifted the flap.  The setting sun,
filtering through canvas, filled the tent with a golden glow.  There, kneeling
beside her bed, was Mama.  In astonished reverence, I waited.

      "What were you doing?" I asked timidly as she arose.

     "I was asking the Heavenly Father to bring my little girls safely home,"
she replied tenderly.

     "I didn't know you could ask Him for things in the daytime," I marveled.  I
had supposed that aside from our regular family prayers, we prayed only before
tumbling into our beds.

     Sitting on the edge of her bed. Mama drew me to her.  ''We are our Heavenly
Father's children," she said.  "He loves us and will listen to us anytime."

     It was all so clear.  Father really meant father. I was really and truly
His little girl, and I could call upon Him whenever I needed to!  My heart was
jubilant. •

     We not only draw spiritual dividends from childhood memories, but other
blessings as well.  As the composer has said "The song is ended, but the melody
lingers on," so Kolob memories are a melody to me - memories that paid my tuition
for my first year in college.

     In 1928, my  english teacher, Mattie Ruesch, without my knowing it, entered
one of my compositions in the lyric poem contest at the B.A.C.  On College Day
I was awarded the Spilsbury Memorial Scholarship for my -

                                   MEMORIES

         Polliwog pond, I see you still, with mud pies on your banks.

         I hear the toads a croaking at our foolish, childish pranks.

         Old pine log, I love you yet, tho' moss grows o'er your sides.

         I seem to see the hollow where the scolding squirrel hides.

         Bluebell bed, your fragrance sweet to me is ever dear.

         I see the wind a blowing your blossoms far and near.

         Childhood days, you'll ne'er depart.  In memory you'll dwell.

         You'll always be my sunshine, for of happy hours you tell.

•Story "Home Safe" published in the September 1975 Friend
-8-


                                   CHAPTER 2

                           THE HOUSE THAT PAPA BUILT

     Our brick house was built during the sad winter that my little brother died.
Mama was tied down with the two of us and couldn't visit the house during con-
struction.  Then came the day that Papa took her to see it.

     "Welcome to our home, sweetheart," he said as they entered the front door.
The winter sun streamed through the windows and the house smelled sweet from
new plaster and pine wood.  From the spacious living room. Mama thoughtfully
walked into the kitchen, visualizing where the stove and cupboard would be.
Opening the stair door, papa beckoned her on, pausing on the stairway.  Proudly
he said "See this closet!  It's something extra we hadn't planned."  Actually
it was a square hole in the wall above the cellar steps, with room to store a
couple of quilts.  On upstairs he led her through the four cheerful bedrooms.
In the master bedroom, the one with the double windows facing the east. Mama
hesitated. With a troubled look she asked "Where are the closets?"

     "Closets are an unnecessary expense," he explained.

     "But we drew them in our plans."

     "The carpenters convinced me that this was easier to install, and much
cheaper," he said pointing to a board nailed horizontally across one wall.  Pro-
truding from it was a row of spike nails.  "There's one in each bedroom."

     Fury welled up inside Mama.  How perfectly horrid the rooms would look with
the family's droopy clothes dangling from nails on the wall!  Couldn't Papa real-
ize that these were modern times!  That they had planned real closets!  She bit
her tongue to keep from saying what was on her mind.  Even her own mother hadn't
had to put up with nails.  At least her father had provided wooden pegs!  Sick
at heart, she suddenly realized that every special feature they had planned in
the house had been omitted.

     Papa's stock answer, as she questioned him was "The carpenters convinced me
I  didn't need it," or "if was a foolish frill."

     Mama's heart lifted when she saw the ample shelves in the pantry where pans
of milk could cool, and she appreciated the cellar, underneath the kitchen, with
its rock walls and dirt floor, and enough shelves for bottled fruit, crocks of
preserves and buckets of lard and molasses.  In the beams overhead were spike
nails for hanging bacon slabs, cured ham and dried herbs.

     Papa saved one little surprise for the last.  In the northwest bedroom
downstairs, was a doll-house sized door.  Opening it, mama saw the rough under-
side of the stair steps, spike nails protruding from them.  If dresses weren't
too long, they could hang here.  So, in all of this big, eight room house,
this little minature was really her only closet!  Airing her disappointment
would only have cast a pall of gloom, and this was to be a day of rejoicing.
Compared to the drafty grainery where they had lived before moving in with Aunt
Alice, this was a castle.

     The family moved into the new home in January 191.2.  Although Mama never
confessed it to Papa, the absence of closets always rankled in her heart.  Years

                                     -9-

 later, at the time Winferd and I were building our home, she related the above

 incident to me.  "Alice," she said,"a woman should be on hand when her home is
being built.  If she isn't, the carpenters will talk her husband out of every
thing she wants."

     Winferd's mother, who was with us at the time, said "She's right.  I had

 to be right there to get what I wanted when Hen built our house, and I did get

 clothes closets.  When I insisted on a bathroom. Hen complained 'We're not
millionaires' but I stayed on the job and we got it."

     All we had was outdoor plumbing down by the barn.

      But our home was a happy one.  On winter mornings when we were small, we
were awakened by the sound of Mama shaking the ashes down in the kitchen stove.
After the kitchen fire was made, she started a fire in the living room stove.
Soon there was a warm spot for us to race to after we had dressed in the arctic
zone upstairs.  It is hard to visualize, unless you've been there, how cold a
house can get during the night when the last whisper of heat dies with the dying
embers after the family has gone to bed.

     Papa couldn't chop wood, so that chore fell mostly to Mama and my older
sisters.  Try as I would, I could never swing an axe good enough to make the
chips fly.  And speaking of chips, they were mighty important.  Without them,
kindling a fire was difficult.  Mama claimed to be the world's champion chip
sifter.

     Flickering firelight lent to the coziness of winter evenings.  That, and
our one kerosene lamp, furnished our lights.  Some of our neighbors were "two-
lamp-families ."

     At supper time. Mama often went to the pantry for more bread or milk, taking
the lamp with her.  The living room moved with weird shadows as she left, and
then was dark.  Then the fire in the little heater danced all the more merrily.
On nights when there was no fire, we sat in the dark.  It was a dark  dark.
There were no street lights or car lights to filter in from the outside.  The
only outside lights were stars or moon or lightning.   On drizzling nights,
nothing.  The only way to comprehend real darkness is to crawl into a tunnel
and feel your way around the bend.  When Mama carried the lamp into the back
part of the house the living room was too dark to even talk.  We sat around
the table smothered in black velvet silence, until the long, funny shadows
backed away at her approach.

     Shadows were an animated part of winter evenings.  With our fingers and
hands we made shadow pictures on the walls of dogs, horses, rabbits and cats.
With the lamp positioned just right our a-nimals would wiggle their ears,
twitch their noses or bark.  Actually they were quite classical.

     Shadow games were popular at parties.  The boys sat in a dark room and the
girls were in a room with the lamp.  A sheet hung over the doorway in between.
Pantomiming in front of the lamplight, the girls cast silent shadows on the
sheet.  Each boy picked out his partner for the next game by identifying her
shadow.

     One night Mama and Papa were invited out.  It was the only night I can re-
call being home without them.  We actually had a whole, unsupervised evening to
ourselves.  When Mama and Papa came home, there, boldly traced in charcoal on
the white front room walls, were the silhouttes of all of us.  Our task the
next day was to wash the walls.

                                     -10-

      The early years in the house that Papa built were probably much the same as

 that of the first settlers in America.  We were on the very tail end  of an era.

 I marvel that I should have been priviliged to live the old life style before

 the world exploded into the new.  Hurricane had no electricity, no pipeline  no

 automobiles and only one telephone.  Airplanes, radios, etc. were undreamed'of

 so far as we were concerned.

      But Hurricane did have one modern marvel.  In March of 1914 Charlie Petty

 opened a moving picture show hall.  It was run by a gasoline motor.  When they

 cranked it up the "putt, putt, putt" could be heard all over town.  Mama let me

 go one night with my sisters Annie, Kate and Mildred.  They had to pay a nickel

 but I was only four, so got in free.  The picture trembled and flickered a lot.

 Men in white overalls were painting a house.  Charlie Chaplin,  with his funny

 duck walk, blundered beneath the ladder and a bucket of paint fell upside down

 over his head.  I cried and ran home, but my sisters stayed.  They laughed at

 me when they got home and said I shouldn't have left because no one really not

 hurt, it was only a picture.

      Grandma Isom built her cute little brick house next door to us.  Grandma

 was as much a part of the family as Mama or Papa or any of the rest of us.  She

 had her special rawhide bottomed chair with a cushion on it, and her comer at

 the table.  She cooked on our kitchen stove and ate all of her meals with us

 except when she had company, and then she served her guests on her own polished

 table, on a fine linen cloth set with elegant china, silverware and crystal.

      I was her legs, trotting back and forth between houses, carrying the butter

 SSri F^163 ?" ^"TTT Her friends were the satin and lace bosomed, talcum

 faced, kid curler*, kid glove and kid shoe variety, and they called me "little

 ^t?^ ^y^^yP-^d me up, smothered me to their bosoms, kissed me and

 said "She looks Just like Evadna."  I hated to be kissed.

      "She's a chatter box and has a wild imagination," was Grandma's usual retort.

      "Grandma, •• I asked one time,"do you wish I was an umbrella so you could

 snut me up?"

      "No," she answered.  "Now say your little piece then run along home."

 ^MY"little piece" was one she had ^^ "e. I recited,"! am a little

 Aatterbox.  My name is Alice May.  The reason why I talk so much, I have so
much to say."  The ladies were delighted, mostly because I was going home.
Paoa buiS"^ t0 Grandma I^T'S house  of old English finer^ the hou^ that
homev  ^  T T"^ PT board floors-  Mama braided scatter ruas t" "^e it
^h^'^T ^ Jake.crawford ma^ °"r dining table. Ifs the same drop-leaf
table that stands in the front room of the old home today.  After Uncle Jake
sanded, stained and varnished it, it gleamed like a mirror.  Jounce, desk
John H^r     ^  where the water bucket and wash basin stood' w^ ^de by
John H? ;' a furnlture maker from England.  On- few rawhide bottomed chairs
were made by my great grandfather, Samuel Kendall Gifford.  Our iron bedsteaS
and n^Sbl      T6 freic!hted ^ team from ^e railroad depot at Lund, U^
and probably came from Sears & Roebuck.  The desk was a two pieced affair  the
BSS-^^^^^
£3?^ mte = tsle ^ ^^u^sr^e—-
•Kid curlers were made from soft, flexible wire covered with kid skin.

                                    -11-

      Qne blustery day I climbed upon the lounge to look out the window.  A man

 sauntered down the sidewalk past our white picket  fence.       wlIla°w'  A man

      "Mama, who is,that man?" I asked.

      "I don't know," she replied.

     Craning my neck to get another look at him, I thought,"Oh my, he must

 have come from the other side of the earth.  He must be from China.11 Never be-

 fore had I seen anyone that Mama didn't know.  In Hurricane, everyone knew

 everyone.
bahv £ september3* 1914 Mama had a <="te little baby girl.  She was the second
^y hornln the house that papa built* but z dontt member anything about
when Edithcame.  She was just there like the rest of my sisters.  What puzzled
me was that the new baby's birthday was one day earlier than Edith's, still
Edith was two years older.

     Now Mama and Papa had six girls in a rowl  Aunt Ellen said it was a shame
the new baby couldn't have been a boy.  I didn't think so.  I knew eSc^ly what
ever^ S  nanle h^ ^ Elva crawford was the Pettiest person^ had
ever seen.  Her eyes and hair were dark and her skin fair.  She was as nice a
S^ ^a S12"1 ^ ever have- If Mama and ^ would nanle 0^ »ew baby
5S'th^ ^ "^ be pretty and nice- I coaxed then1 t0 ^d they didn't say
they wouldn't.  At Sacrament Meeting I listened, and when Papa named our baby
LaPriel, I scrunched my eyes tight to squeeze back the tears.  LaPriel was an
ugly, ugly name and I'd never, never call her that.  What's more. ^ never^tell
SL0^^1^63 Mhat her name was- I was embarrassed. Shen'a funny Sing
happened to the name.  It got nicer every day and before LaPriel even learned to
goo, I knew Papa had named her right.                                      -i-eoJ.nea T.O

     A chill autumn wind was scattering the poplar leaves.  Barefoot days

 were over.  Will and Maude Savage of LaVerkin, drove up to our gate in a

 buckboard and delivered a woven rag carpet to us.  We'd never had such a

 luxury before because it took many rags and many rag bees to tear, sew and

 wind enough balls for a carpet.  This was our one and only.  will's Aunt
Adelaide was the weaver, and his mother Mary Ann the rag inspector. Adelaide
Srv^ n:r ^hi?? ^at might make the carpet lum^ (Lelaide ^
Sev wereS^   ?   ^ way from counci1 Bluff' Iowa t0 salt Lake wh^
they were little girls, and their mother Arm pushed a handcart.)
^,,4.^ P3-1^^^ straw on the living room floor and the new carpet was
unon2 T^17 over it andtacked dow"- ^ ^d I tumbled and bounced
kne^  ^^  was, s0 springy that I felt like I was walkin0 ^th bent
knees. So let the wind scatter the poplar leaves. The house was snug and cozy.


                                CHAPTER 3

                            PAPA'S FEMININE WORLD

                                (1915)

     Papa was a blessed man, surrounded bv womwn  va ha^ ^i     -^
bywmen. He .as the only boy in San^^'Sy, "^nis ^ers^E?^01"^
Aunts Ellen, Alxce and Mary lived in Hurricane, and they^raipsed^our nouse

                                     -12-

 real often to see that "George was eating right."  They pampered him and he often

 reminded us  with a grin, that he was "the cutest little boy along the river."

 Just imagine what Mama had to put up with!  All that adulation, plus his special

 little side dishes at the dinner table and all.

       Papa took all of the fussing for granted, as though it was his just dessert.

 He played his role with dignity, and set the rules that our household had to abide

 by. Although his feet could not run, his voice reached everywhere, giving instr-

 uctions or laying down the law.  He was the disciplinarian.  Mama executed his

 orders.

       We got more training at the dinner table than anywhere else.  Papa, Grand-

 ma and Mama were a trio.  Grandma always said, "Now mind your manners," and Papa

 would say, "Don't take anything on your plate you cannot eat."  Mama put the food

 before us and silently ate.

       Once when I couldn't finish the molasses on my plate. Papa said,"it looks

 like your eyes are bigger than your belly," and Grandma added,"when the pig gets

 full, the slop gets sour."  My plate with its puddle of molasses  was set on a

 pantry shelf, and the next meal it was set before me.  Before I could have any-

 thing else, I had to dean it up.  Eating off a dirty plate was punishment.  It

 never happened again.

       If ^ over-estimated and took too much food, I struggled until it was gone.

 But it wasn't fair to have to eat what someone else put on my plate, like pig

 rind.  Once when Grandma dished up my beans, there was a wiggling, curled up

 piece of pig rind floating in my soup.  The fat side curled out, half clear.

 Jelly like and slimy.  My stomach lurched at the sight of it.

       "Now you eat it," Grandma demanded.  "If you waste it, there'll come a

 day you'll wish you had it."

      We were always threatened with starvation as a matter of discipline  I

 couldn't enjoy the beans because I knew I had to eat the rind.  I'd rather be
thrashed.  With Grandma sitting next to me there was nothing to do but cut into
the detestable morsel and try.  The greasy piece stuck in my throat and I
gagged.  Tears welled in my eyes.  Rubbing them away with my fist, I obediently
gulped down all of that horrid rind. I resolved right then to never, never force
a child to eat what he didn't take.

      There was some conflict in Grandma's philosophy,however.  Tough as she was
about our cleaning our plates, she would still say,"It is better that food should
waste than a belly should burst," when we licked up the last morsel left in a
bowl as we cleared the table.

      To have Papa and Grandma boss us was an accepted thing, but to have Kate
think she could do it too, exasperated me.  Just because she was five years older
than I didn't give her any authority.  Annie didn't boss me, neither did Mildred.
They were peaceful.  Mildred and I cut out paper dolls together and made little
houses under the desk when Kate thought we should be doing something else.  Kate
was a lot like Papa and Grandma.  One day when she hit me, I sat down in the
middle of the kitchen floor and howled in fury.

     "If I bawl loud enough," I thought,"Kate will get slappedl" I yelped a mighty
blast, and Mama,walking past, swatted me across my wide open mouth.  In shocked
surprise I shut up instantly.  Without saying a word. Mama had straightened me
out.

      In the springtime, when the apricot tree was in bloom, our new carpet was
taken up.  This was part of the spring-cleaning ritual for these were the days

                                    -13-
before vacuum cleaners.  We swept with a straw broom.  On Saturdays, to make the
carpet nice for Sunday,'the broom was dipped in a bucket of water, then shaken.
The damp straw picked up extra dirt and kept the dust down.  And now, with sun-
shine spilling everywhere, the carpet was pulled out and hung over the clothes
line to be beaten clean and stored for winter.  The straw that had been shiny
gold last fall Was pulverized to powder,to be swept out and burned.  The hush
of winter's insulation was gone,and the bright, scrubbed room echoed as merrily
as the sparrows in the currant bushes.

      The smell of blossoms  and the song of the birds put a wanderlust yearning
within me.  Frank Realty's family lived kitty-comer across the street from us.
Mildred Beatty was my playmate and she had relatives living in Leeds.  One Sat-
urday rooming I wistfully watched her Pa hitch their team to the wagon.

      "Alice,,would you like to go to Leeds with us?" Sister Beatty asked.

      "Oh yes," I gasped.

      "Run and ask your mother," she said.

      I ran across the street, but I was afraid Mama would say no.  We never went
anywhere but to Virgin, Kolob or Springdale.  I wanted to go with Beattys more
than anything, and couldn't bear the thought of being refused.  Slipping into the
house, I hid behind the front door with my face to the wall.  "Mama," I whispered,
"can I go to Leeds with Beattys?"  "Yes you can go," I answered softly.  Racing
back I said "Mama said I could go."

      I should have enjoyed my first view of the other side of the earth, but I
didn't.  My conscience nagged me.  It was dark before we got home.  I took my
scolding because I knew I deserved it, but the terrible thing was the nightmare
I had after I went to bed.  All night long the "bad man" chased me in his long
legged underwear.  He was big and flabby fat, pale and bald headed except for one
gray whisp of hair that waved when he ran after me.  The whole night through I
barely managed to keep out of his reach.

      I had tasted the wages of sin and was relieved to see daylight streaming in
through our bedroom window and to hear the resounding ring of Papa kissing Mama.

      Papa's and Mama's bedroom was down the hall from ours, and always when he
awoke in the morning, his kiss reverberated through the upstairs rooms, sounding
like the ring of Uncle Lew's hammer on the iron tires of his wagon wheel.  Alth-
ough I couldn't see, I knew exactly how Mama's face looked.  Papa wore a big,
bushy moustache, and his kiss was much the same as being kissed by a haystack.
His lips never met Mama's because she always screwed her mouth away from him,
giving him lots of cheek which he smacked with a merry sound.

      He also puckered up after every meal and leaned toward her at the table,
planting his bristling affection upon her cheek, and we watched with pleasure,
because Mania's mouth was drawn half way across her face to the opposite ear.

      My sisters and I came in pairs.  Annie and Kate were a team and slept in
the southwest bedroom, Mildred and I in the northwest bedroom and Edith and La-
Priel in the northeast bedroom just off Mama's and Papa's big southeast bedroom.
Mama and Papa had a feather tide on top of their shuck tick.  When we piled into
their bed we almost sunk out of sight.  Our beds were crackly corn shucks.

      Papa was surrounded by girls, including our playmates.  Uncle Lew and Aunt
Mary Campbell's family lived in the next house east of us, and Uncle Marion and
Aunt Mary Stout's family lived in the next house west of us.  Venona Stout and
Zantha Campbell were a little older than I but they played with Mildred Beatty
and me, and they were very important people in my life.

                                        -14-

      When strangers came to our house, Edith would crawl back against the wall

 under the lounge and stay until after they left.  Once she stayed there almost

 all day.

      Papa was a loving patriarch.  He called the family together daily for family

 prayer.  Our days began and ended with all of us on our knees together.

                                    CHAPTER 4

                                 MAN MADE MARVELS

                                     (1916)

      The desk in the front room was a hazard.  It stood on legs high enough for

 the baby to toddle under without bumping her head, and the cabinet on top teet-

 ered precariously when both doors were open, so Mama put the top part on the

 floor in the north room.  It made a cool counter top for the pans of milk in the

 summer.

      This was our first summer in Hurricane, and the upstairs bedrooms were like

 a furnace compared to Kolob, so we slept downstairs.  Edith and LaPriel slept on

 the floor in front of the desk top.  One morning, as they played on their bed,

 they hung onto the desk doors and it toppled, spilling the milk on them.  Looking

 like drowned rats they spluttered and bawled.  Their hair was matted with slathers

 of cream and their nightgowns were plastered to them.  They were a ridiculous

 sight in their puddle of milk.

      It didn't seem right to not be going to the ranch, but summers in Hurricane
brought new discoveries.  I learned that July fruit is not always bruised.  When
Uncle Ron's boys brought apricots and peaches to Kolob, the fruit arrived bruised,
oozy brown and delicious.  I thought it grew that way and I loved the bruises.

      Hurricane had been celebrating Peach Day since 1913, but this year was our

 first time.  The fruit was spread under the shade of the trees on tables made of
planks.  Melons, peaches, apples, plums and grapes were heaped high.  People even

 came from Cedar and St. George in their wagons.  Indians pitched their camp north
of town.  This was a two day celebration.  On the afternoon of the second day,
the melons were cut and everyone ate the fruit display.  How jolly  it wast
Dozens of wagons, with teams tied to the side of them, were parked on the north
end of main street where Marzell Covington  lives today. Horseshoe pitching and
other sports were in progress, when from somewhere in the direction of LaVerkin,
a strange roaring and popping was heard.  The horses moved uneasily, snorting and
tossing their manes.  Then a chugging vehicle appeared, laying a trail of dust.
puffing clouds of smoke from its rear.  Wild eyed, the horses reared on their
hxnd legs and squeeled.  Men hung onto the horses halters to calm them.
The vehicle came to a stop where the crowd was the thickest.

     "It's an automobile, an automobile," some kid shrilled.

     Wowl  If we'd been on Kolob, I might never, never have seen one!  It made a
terrible noise, and smelled awful, but it ran without horses.  Wagon covers and
buggy tops were white, but this vehicle was black topped.  The wheels had wooden
spokes, were smaller than wagon wheels and had rubber tires.

     Mr. Fox owned the car, and he offered to take passengers for 10<t a mile
Five people could ride at a time.  Grandma gave each of us a dime and I sat in
the front seat by Mr. Fox.  All the way to the flour mill and back I sized up
the car's Interior.  It had  isinglass  windows rolled up like blinds, and a
bristling coco_mat on the floor.  Mr. Fox had a mole on his right cheek with
three hairs sticking out.  Maybe that's why they called him Mr. Fox.  My. how I
wished I had another dime!

                                       -15-

      In September I went to the Beginners in the same room with the First Grade.

 My sisters went to school in the Church House and in the Relief Society build-

 ing, but we were in Robb Stratton's building that was supposed to be a store,

 on the comer of what is now 112 West and State.  You had to be seven to go to the

 First Grade.  My cousin Josephine Spendlove was our teacher.

      In the winter we were either too hot or too cold, depending on where we sat

 from the pot bellied stove.  Probably that's why we were dressed like cucoons.

      "Guess what?" I piped one evening at supper.  "We had a program in school

 today and I sang a song all by myself."

      "You did!"  Mama exclaimed.

      "What did you sing?" Grandma asked.

      "I sang 'Oh that chicken pie, put in lots of spice.  How I wish the goodness

 that I had another slice.'"  With a happy sigh, I settled back waiting for the

 family's praise.  Instead, everyone grinned, then someone whispered,"She can't

 even carry a tune."  I was crushed.  Later, when Miss Spendlove asked me to sing,

 I refused.

      Coming home from school each day, we walked past the loafers, or what some

 folks called the Spittin* an' Whittlin' Club. The front of, or the side of Charlie

 Petty's store, depending on the season, the wind or the sun, was the gathering

 place for the farmers.  After school, we'd pass them, leaning against the store,
or squatting on their heels, enjoying the afternoon  break before chore time.
Some of my playmates used to stop and beg their dads for nidcels.  Impressed. I

 decided to try it.,

      "Papa, can I have a nickel?" I asked, expecting him to say no.

     Instead, he dug into his pocket and handed me one.  I felt sheepish.  I didn't
really want the nickel.

     Walking into the store, I surveyed the jars of hard tack candy and the pack-
ages of gum.  I couldn't spend the money on something that would be eaten up and
forgotten, so I bought a yard of inch wide, red, white and blue striped ribbon
that I took to my room.  Occasionally I'd spread it across my lap, or thoughtfully
run it between my fingers.

     A fun pastime was making up little plays and charging ten pins for the ticket.
One afternoon we noticed the door to the wooden church house ajar, an open invita-
tion to go on stage.  We'd just cast the parts to Red Riding Hood, when dark
West's frame filled the doorway.  He was the janitor.  With the terrible voice of
authority, he demanded to know why we were there.  I was scared.  He stood with
his feet spread wide and I observed how long his legs were and how much room there
was   between, so in a sudden longing for freedom I darted between his legs and
ran home.                                                                -

     Meat markets and refrigeration didn't exist.  Grandma and Papa had cattle
"on the range", and when a beef was butchered the word was spread through town.
Papa always had his beef animal done in the early morning before the flies awoke
and people came from all over town with their little pans to buy a cut of fresh
meat.  We usually ended up with the heart and the liver.  Mama stuffed the heart.
We called it "Yorkshire Pudding" but it was more like sage dressing than a pud-
ding.  Trying to eat the liver is what made a vegetarian out of me.
^  Thank^givSg day' plank and ^^""e tables were set up in the church house
and covered with snowy white table cloths.  People came in buggies and wagons0

                                     -16-
bringing their good food and pretty dishes.  We walked through the ankle deep
snow.  My feet were soaked and my toes ached, but nothing could dim the joy of
the only community Thanksgiving I can remember.

     Grownups had a good thing going in those days.  They expected total respect
from young folks, and they seemed to get it.  An oft repeated axiom was,"Children
should be seen and not heard."  This was simply a matter of dicipline.  Also,
it was an accepted custom, that at any large dinner, grownups ate first.  Young-
sters, out of respect for their elders, must leam patience and wait their turn.
So it was with this community Thanksgiving.  The grownups ate while we got our
shoes still more soggy by trying to make a snowman.  When our fingers got purple,
we collected around the stove.  Our good behavior was rewarded by the full and
loving attention of the grownups as they waited on us as we were seated around
the second table.

     A few days after Thanksgiving, my sisters brought their baking powder cans
tinkling with pennies and nickieia and dumped them out onto the table to be counted.
Wide eyed I watched and listened to their chatter about paying tithing.

     I didn't have any nickels or pennies.  I didn't even have an empty baking
powder can, but I knew a little about tithing.  I had seen the loads of tithing
hay being hauled to the tithing barn, and I had watched Mama push the firm,
yellow butter from the wooden mould onto the wrapper for "tithing butter."  And
our chickens laid "tithing eggs." •r-oofnota

      "Mama, when can I pay tithing?" I asked.

     Mama's dough covered hands stopped still in the big pan where she was mix-
ing bread.  She looked at me for a long minute then smiled.  "My goodness, you
are getting to be a big girl, aren't you2  Why of course you want to pay tith-
ing."

     After the dough was washed from her hands, she said,"Come with me."

     I followed her to the chicken run, where she scattered a little wheat.
Greedily, the chickens flocked around her and she slipped her hands over the wings
of a young, black rooster.

     "Here," she said,handing him to me, "hold him while I tie his legs."

     From a bunch of used binding twine that hung on the corral fence she select-
ed a short piece.  Securing the rooster's legs she said "you've been a good girl
to help feed the chickens, so you can take this rooster to Bishop Isom for tith-
ing."

     My sisters giggled at the rooster squirming in my arms, as I announced I
was going to the bishop's with them.  I hugged my rooster as we walked the six
blocks to his house and the rooster chuckled back at me.

     When Bishop Samuel Isoro saw us coming through his gate, his front door
opened wide.  His ample front was made for hugging children and his big mous-
tache made his laugh seem extra jolly.

     Seeing the rooster he asked,"Ho, ho,what's this?"

     "He's a tithing rooster," I announced.

     "Ah, he's a fine one," the bishop said,taking the chicken from me and set-
ting him down on the porch.
•Eggs were considered a woman's petty cash.  Women tended the hens and turned her
surplus  eggs in to the store for "script."  There were "tithing eggs" and "Sun-
day eggs."  The two-roomed, brick Relief Society building in Hurricane was built
with "Sunday Eggs."

                                      -17-

     The Bishop sat at his roll top desk and my sisters paid him their nickels
and pennies and he made out our receipts.  As he handed them to us he gave us
each a loving pat.

     "Will you please read my receipt for me?" I asked^looking up at him.

     "Gladly," he replied.  Taking it from me he ready"Alice Isom has voluntar-
ily contributed to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, one rooster."

     I tingled all over. The church was so big and I was so small, still I had
contributed to it I

     When we got home Mama gave me an empty mentholatum jar.  "You can keep your
tithing money in this from now on," she said.

     The jar was shiny and warm from the scrubbing she had given it, scrubbing
off the label.  The translucent milk white glass was beautiful to me.  I loved
that mentholatum jar and used it all through my childhood. •

                                     CHAPTER. 5

                                 BIG THINGS HAPPEN

                                       (1917)

     ZCMTused to give Grandma a box of creamy, soft, swirly chocolate at Chris-
tmas time.  The box was big, but so was Grandma's posterity, and I knew one piece
was all I'd get.  And this piece I licked fondly until there was nothing left
but the good smell on my fingers.  Sometimes Grandma gave me the empty fluted
cups and breathing deeply I'd bury my nose in them.  She knew what a rare treat
this was to all of us.

     One day when we were at Grandma's house with our cousins, she brought out
her chooalate box.  Breaking the cellophane from the shiny, pink box, she removed
the velvet ribbon.  Our mouths watered.  She lifted the lid and chocolate aroma
filled the room.  To each child she passed her treasure.  Breathlessly I waited
and finally she held the box before me.

     "Do you want a chocolate,Alice?" she asked.

     Trying not to appear too eager I timidly replied,"! don't care."

     "Well," she retorted,"if you don't care, I'm certainly not going to waste
one on you."

     And she didn't.  I was crushed.  But the lesson she taught me has never been
forgotten.  I learned that I'd better let it be known that I do care, one way or
another, about everything of importance.  I also learned to say "Yes please," or
"No thank you."

     Grandma's house had plush carpets of red roses and dark green leaves on a
rich brown background.  Light, filtering through white lace curtains, was re-
flected in the soft sheen of her polished furniture.

     Edith and I were her dusting girls.  Sometimes our cousin Virginia Camp-
bell helped.  Edith was Grandma's favorite duster because she sat tirelessly
under the dining table, working the dust cloth into every curlicue of the
carved legs.  Her fingers also went round and round through the fancy iron work
under the sewing machine.  I detested fussy details.  Still, Grandma gave me
as many lemon drops and peppermints as she did Edith.  Edith knew she deserved
• Story "The Happy Tithe Payer" published in the May 1976 Friend.

                                     -18-

  more and she and Virginia helped themselves from the shoebox of candy on the

  marble top table in the parlor.  Those frosted lemon drops were as tempting

  to me as to them, but my nagging conscience held me bade.  So Edith and Virgin-

  ia snitched freely and I shared the blame.

      Grandma didn't blame gently either.  Once she accused me of using all of her

 blade shoe polish.

      "Grandma, I didn't do it," I said.

      "It's no use for you to tell me that, for I know full well you did," she

 snapped.                                                                  -

      I stood up for myself the best I could, but she said I was being disrespect-

 ful and sassy.  I was humiliated, because Aunt Mary Campbell was there.  I

 Sl;n^VS^ V^ of com^' one look ^ my shoes would show that

 they never had been shined, except with soot, and that rarely.

      Tears stung my eyes and my throat ached.  I was trying hard not to cry.

 Aunt Mary put her arm around me.  The squeeze of her hand and the look in her

 eyes told me she knew I was innocent.  I resolved that when I became a Grandma

 I would never tell a grandchild they did something if they said they didn't.

      Grandma braided my hair snake-braid.  The idea was to weave each lock of

 bSdS ^^y^ it ^^ come undone. She wore a"hL5?as s^e

 reason^ S^L^ help? h^ <aoa neater* tighter job-  That wlsn1t th- ^1

 a^£S-   ?hthlnlblewas for thumping my head when I wiggled. I had to sit like

 ;k£ £ tooand"1^.^ ^ s; tight at the temples that she allnost braid^ my

 moSh^SiA.   he outer co"lers of my ^ "P* and the <=orners of my

 ^"2^ S    A scow1 Mould have been iInPo^ible, because the muscles were

 ^^ ^oppos3-te way- I becalne s0 ^^ headed I ^Id have been hung by

 my braids without feeling it.  But my hair, as Grandma lamented, was Uke^nakes

 bS^S a^ ^ T time- Mama ^led it wirey. No way could tte^sofT '

 braids be fastened so they would stay.  Once undone, the braids unravelled Ske

 g^a thread on a knitted sode. That meant more head thumping"^Grant's

 So^J::^^^   ^^S^^es-p^^^^

 SSssS^^^^^

 1.^ ^dTend-mTpatT^^^^      ^wn^tTshiS ^e"buck°:tTak^

 ^^SzSe^^ spendlove or ^^ and Grandpa "i^o" o^ Al^s'traZ

     Even though Grandma and Papa did most of the d-i.smr.-Hr^r,   *.i,
«h» ^a too. , hand, and ^^he aid l^'^11^'^.mr^^

                                       -19-

 our quarreling or fighting.  If two of us got into a scrap, she cut three

 willows, one for each of us and one for herself.

      Raising her stick, she'd say,"All right, if you two want to fight you're

 going to do it right.  Now you hit each other or I'll hit you."

      My arm would go weak in the elbow.  I couldn't begin to lift my stick.

 Looking at my sister, then back at Mama I'd whimper, "I don't want to fight."

      "Do as you're told and hit each other," she would demand.

      We'd both be sniveling by now.  "We don't want to fight," we'd howl.

      "Then kiss each other and behave yourselves."

      Kissing each other was the worst punishment of all, but it was either that

 or the tingling of the willow.  Usually it was the latter.  But Mama didn't

 have to use this method on us often.  It was drastic enough to make for lasting

 peace.

      But the world wasn't at peace.  Grandma digested the Deseret News each

 evening and we got a review of the news the following day at meal time.  Often

 when I was busting to talk. Papa would say, "Shhh, Grandma is talking."

      A war was going on.  The Germans, especially Old Kaiser Bill, were the bad

 guys and the English, with the British Fleet were the good guys and they were

 scrapping over France.  Little Belgium was the stomping ground.

     When our stable was cleaned, the manure was always pitched out of the two

 east windows.  The mounds dried and we used to play one mound was Bunker Hill

 and the other Golden Hill.  We wore a powdery trail in between as we ran back

 and forth.  Now these piles became France and Germany and we played "Kaiser Bill
went up the hill to kill the king of France.  Kaiser Bill came down the hill with
bullets in his pants."

     As Grandma reported the news, vivid pictures built up in my mind.  The
British and Germans were deadlocked somewhere in Belgium.  Neither side could
advance, so they dug trenches for themselves.  Parallel lines of trenches ran
dear across northern France from Flanders to Switzerland.  "No man's land"
was the strip between.  I pictured the Germans burrowing in their muddy trenches
like mean little gophers.  Grandma's reports were awful!  Millions of lives were
lost in those trenches by machine guns, poison gas and liquid fire.

     Stories of German submarines filled the news.  Grandma was aghast at the
news when the Lusitania was sunk, drowning over a thousand people.  The Lusitania
was a British ship of war, but was carrying just plain people, a lot of them
Americans.  President Woodrow Wilson let Germany know we didn't like this one bit
but Germany sank eight more American ships.  In a single week they sank eighty-
eight ships. (The American People by Muzzy Pages 631-637)

     President Wilson said,"It is a fearful thing to lead this great and peaceful
people into war . . . . but the right is more precious than peace." (Muzzy 631)

     On April 6, 1917 the United States of America declared war on Germany
Our country was involved in World War I.  (Muzzy 632)

  ^  Fortunately, the world continues to turn, war or no war, and springtime
brings sheep shearing time.  The Goulds Shearing Corral upon the Hurricane Hill
was fast becoming the biggest operation of its kind in the world, so the story
goes.  Aunt Alice and Uncle Will Spendlove ran one cook shack, cooking for thirty
or forty men, and Thad and Lizzy Ballard ran the other cook shack, cooking for the

                                      -20-

 same number of men.  Uncle Will came to Hurricane almost every day for water

 and supplies, and Thad did too.  Thad had a water tank that was as long as the

 bed of his wagon.

    Papa decided it would be a good family outing to go to Goulds so he borrowed

 Uncle Ren's team and wagon.  To ride anywhere was a treat to us.  Mama put a

 denim quilt over a shuck tide in the wagon box for us to sit on and packed the

 grub box.  She sat up front on the spring seat beside Papa.

    I was so excited I could hardly contain myself.  I thought of the good picnic

 Mama had prepared and of seeing Aunt Alice and Uncle Will and of watching the

 men shear sheep.

    When Papa slapped the reins- on the horses backs, the wagon creaked and

 swayed as the horses pulled into the ruts in the road.  Going up the Hurricane

 Hill was scarey, because the dugway was narrow and steep, but I savored each

 turn of the wheels.  Once on top, the horses settled into an easy gait and I

 stretched out on the bed, enjoying the protection of the tightly stretched

 wagon cover over the bows that the beating sun illuminated but did not pene-

 trate. The horses jogged along and the wagon wheels ground pleasantly in the

 dirt, lulling me to sleep.  When I awoke, we were going down the hill and papa

 was pulling back on the brake rope.

    "Aren't we going to Goulds?" I asked.

    "We have been to Goulds," one of my sisters replied.

    "But ^ haven't;' I cried.

    "Ch yes you have.  You just didn't wake up," someone said.

    Crawling over to where Mama sat, I said,"Mama, I haven't been to Goulds,

 have It"                                                                  '

    She looked at me in surprise and put her arm around me.  "Bless you," she

 said^"! guess we forgot to wake you."

    "Oh Mama," I cried,"you didn't have the picnic without me did you?"

    She looked stricken.  "I'm afraid we did.  There were so many people, I guess

 we didn't notice you were still in the wagon asleep."

    I didn't just cry.  I howled broken heartedly.  How could anyone do that to
met  How could they, when we simply never, never went anywhere!  "I didn't even

 get to see the shearing corral," I bawled.

   Everyone was sorry, but I knew I would never get to go again, and I didn't.

   My disappointment over the Goulds trip was deeper than I can express.  It
had been so good just to smell a wagon cover again and to hear the clopping of
^T^ AlongiJlgfor the annual trek to Kolob was revived, stirring within me
almost to the point of obsession.  I yearned for the sight of bluebells, pink
phlox, squirrels and pine trees.

   I'm sure Mama felt very sorry about the slip-up on the Goulds trip too. so
when Aunt Ellen and Uncle Ren Spendlove invited me to go to Kolob with them for
the summer. Mama and Papa consented to let me go.  I was transported with joy.
J^ 7^     .of th! roady caroping under the "P^ sk^ watching the dying
embers of the campfire, hearing once more the sound of horses munchinq crainin
their nose bags.  With a happy heart I drifted off to sleep.  TOmcnlng graln ln

   The early morning climb up the mountain brought us to Heaveni  A Heaven o-F
and'VelT6 pinest the snlen of sage and racing through Meadow w?tT^n?ce

                                      -21-

     Aunt Ellen made corn bread for supper.  She put a piece on my plate with

  yellow butter melting through it.  I took one bite but could not swallow.  I

  looked at the dear faces in the lamplight.  WHERE WAS MAMA?  WHERE WERE MY

  SISTERS AND PAPA?  My throat tightened.  I picked up my plate and headed for

  the door.

     "Where are you going?" Aunt Ellen asked.

    With a gulp I answered,"I want to eat my corn bread outside."

     It was still twilight.  I sat with my bade against a pine tree, my plate in

 my lap.  I tried to eat but couldn't.  Tears were splashing on my dress.  Why?

 Here I was at my very own Kolob, sitting against my favorite tree, with my

 favorite food on my plate, still I was crying.  Digging a hole in the sand, I

 buried the bread and then I cried hard.  In that moment I knew Heaven would never

 be Heaven without my family.

    The next day Lafe and Tennessee Spendlove galloped in on a little budcboard

 to deliver some things to Aunt Ellen.  They were returning to Hurricane that after-

 noon, and I begged to go with them.  Venice and Velma coaxed me to stay, but I

 would not.                                                            -'

    When I got home. Hurricane looked hot, dull and dry.  I realized that I had

 run away from Kolob.  This time I fell desperately ill.  Heartbroken, a homesick

 longing as big as the earth and sky seemed almost to crush the life out of me

 a longing to bring together the two dearest things on earth to me, my family and

 Kolob.  And this could never be.

    It was quarterly conference and the house swarmed with relatives from "up the

 river."  I was on the bed in the northwest bedroom and was going to die.  I knew

 it and I knew Mama and all of the relatives knew it.  This was the end.  Then I

 saw the concern on Mama's face and I said,"Mama, if you will get Brother Barber

 and Brother Jepson to help papa administer to me I will be better."  They came

 and after the administration I was well instantly.

    On June 5th, my cousin lanthus Campbell died.  He was one of the babies that

 had inspired my sisters to pray for twins.  Now lantha was left without her twin

 tne same as I was.

      lanthus used to play ball in the street with us.  Our balls were made of

 tightly wound carpet rags, stitched on the outside with carpet warp in a honey-

 comb stitch.  Our bats were pieces of board whittled narrow at the handle and

 wide as a paddle - the wider the better our chance for hitting the ball.

      Sometimes lanthus teased me.  Once I got so aggravated I hit him with the

 garden rake.  I couldn't hit him good because the rake was too heavy for me to

 swing, but I got him good enough to make him run home bawling.  Uncle Lew said

 he was going to take me to Kolob and use me for coyote bait.  Now lanthus was

 gone and he would never pitch a ball to me again, and I wished I had never hit

 him.

     But Uncle Lew and Aunt Mary still had one boy, Marcus, the same age as Edith.
The nearest thing Papa had to being a boy was me.  Grandma said I was a Tomboy
and Papa encouraged it.  When Sam Pollock came to play checkers. Papa used to get
me to shinny up the porch poles.  Sam would say, "Ah George, she can climb as good
as any boy."  I wasn't interested in being "as good as."  I wanted to be "better
than," so that's when I started climbing to the peak of the bam.  When Grandma
-22-


 saw me walking along the ridge of the barn roof, she fluttered into the yard

 screeching, "Aaalliss, come right down before you break your neck.'"  From my

 perch she looked wonderfully small down by the woodpile, and I loved her cluck-

 ing and ruffling her feathers over me.  I climbed down, but I knew I would climb

 up again because I wanted Papa to brag about me.  Then there was the mulberry

 tree in front of Grandma's house.  The top limbs were even higher than the barn.

 When Grandma saw me swaying overhead she went into a roost satisfactory dither

 and I climbed down to please her.  Between her spasms and Papa's braqqinq I felt

 famous.                                                                -i-»  -)

      We used to sing a song that went something like this:

                My sister wears a velvet dress and ostrich  feather hat

                And white kid gloves and shiny shoes and all such things as

                    that.

                She goes to parties, matinees and dances all she can,

                But she can never do the things I'll do when I'm a man.

                Cho.

                A girl can't be a cowboy, or run away to sea,

                Or be an Injun fighter, like I intend to be,

                So I don't care what she may wear, it never makes me mad,

                For I shall run the country when I'm big like Dad.

      This song made me wish I was a boy.  Sometimes I honestly resented beinq

 a girl.                                                                            3

     Although it had been years since Grandma had closed her store in Virgin

 she could still buy wholesale from ZOC.  In fact, ZQCT not only gave her choco-

 lates every year, but they also gave her a rich looking satin dress piece

 every summer when she returned to Salt Lake to visit relatives and friends.

 And always she returned with a big cardboard box filled with white canvas slip-

 pers, a pair for each of her granddaughters.  She bought them for ten or twenty

 cents a pair.  With each pair she gave us a half-moon shaped piece of chalk to

 keep them white.  We only wore them on the 4th and 24th of July and on Sunday

 The rest of the time we went barefooted.

     Sometimes we made moccasins out of the backs of old overalls, to protect
our feet from the scorching earth and from the grass burs.  Our winter shoes -
riLST^ S"^ ^^ a year • had high tops that either laced <"- buttoned.
A button-hook hung by the door between the front room and the kitchen.  Saturday
on^u3 ^"^ \stovel3•d\lPsi^ ^ ^ with a rag and spit we rubbed soot
on our shoes, blacking them for Sunday.
4--    i^3"^8^7 traded P^P^y wit^ Charlie Workman and moved his  family  prac-
tically off the earth.  They moved at least two miles away in the Hurricane
fields.  That meant that I lost Mildred Beatty for a playmte.  But WorSans
built a house a half block up the street and I got a new playmate, Eloise!^
S^b3 s1 stersHa2e1* Flora and ^sey used to read stories to us. When they
read the people in the stories came alive, they were so full of expression.
^Ty I  S S3 car1 and Eldon treated us lilce 9^"-"PS and entertained us,

                        s^. ^ s^"13 s^s ^ —
„ aSJihTd^ Sue^e^r^; ^s;.^ s?
continued and the new kids started right out in th. first S"S »Sn.?";ir,

                                    -23-

 With a wounded, superior air, we looked down on those little "babies" the whole

 year through.  But one thing eased the blow, and that was that it made us kind

 of distinctive for we were the last of the beginners, and the new little kids

 were the first, first graders to be only six years old.

 The new school building was not quite finished, so we started the first grade in

 the Relief Society building.

 Great things were going on in Hurricane.  Tall power poles were being planted

 down every street.  How exciting it was when electricians began wiring our housel

 My little sisters and I were right underfoot to grab every metal slug the men

 dropped to the floor.  They were the size and color of nickel coins.

 The electric power was turned on in Hurricane in September 1917.  Every comer

 had a street light and lights shone from every home.  How beautiful it was!

 Light globes were delicate, exquisite things of thin, crystal clear glass,

 with delicate wires inside, glowing first red, then bright yellow when the power

 was turned on.  A globe hung from a drop cord in the center of each room in our

 house.  The front room, kitchen and hall had wall switches - push buttons in a

 copper plate.  In the other rooms the lights were turned on at the globe.  We

 were fascinated with the magic that took place when we pushed the button, but

 Papa sternly said,"This is no play thing.  You will wear out the switches."

 He made a strict rule that the lights were to be turned on only once each niqht

 and we could take turns at that.  When it was my turn, I looked iorward with

 excitement all day for the coming of night. We boasted and bragged to our play-

 mates about the brightness of our lights.  To out-do us all, lantha said their

 lights were so bright they had to open the door to let a little dark in.

 Burned out light globes became treasures.  Women crocheted lace coverings for

 them and used them as ornamental curtain tie-backs.

 But electricity was undependable.  We did'nt put the kerosene lamp away, because

 with every gusty wind or rain squall, the power went off.  Each time Mama lit

 the lamp. Papa remarked, "Another cow must have stepped in the Santa Clara Creek "

 That's where our power came from.

 On the rooming of October 30th Grandma came from Mama's bedroom.  "Good morning

 girls,  she said,"the stork brought you a little baby brother in the night."

 f^0'"^1"? the roomwith a ^y look on "^ face. It was a grin with tears
in it, like he was laughing and crying at the same time.
roo^ahea?^ us? you can see Your new brother*" Grandma s^ 9^9 into Mama's
Mama smiled at us and pulled the covers back so we could see the little creature
S^ r^dledbeslde her- we11^ He certainly wasn't any beauty. He^as
bald headed as a jack-o-lantern.  If he had waited one more day he would have
been born on Halloween. "If I were Mama." I thought,"I'd stick to girls."
What I couldn't quite figure out was why everyone who came to our house made such
a fuss over Papa.  All of our Aunts kissed him and said, "Well Georgeat ^ast vS
^ ^e s0^" and the rorners of papats """^che twitched and^e bat^ hG

                   Sic?? ^..^^^^^^s-
d^l^lTy yo^f^ons^aws" way- ——— —————'-rg^omTda'y the
^^c^boS^^d-fo;^ Howard-^ ^came^ Eng^

                                    -24-

  Papa had Howard in his name too, and since George had been given to rov twin

  our new brother got the Howard part.                                 -     *

  G^nri0^1?^?1^ °f the excitement of """-icane growing, and our family growing,

  G^ £?<- S  S^"3^^ about the war with Sermany. We heard about, saw

  S-f^ fc   effects ^^Y- ^^y "an between the ages of twenty-one and

  thirty had to register for military service.  Looking back, I don't see how

  ^oked0^?"^00^ "T had ^.B jaunty air about ^^ ^e^eas. Our soldiers

  ^Sh  ^ ^ and sangt nlaking the war ^P^ t0 be a romantic adventure.

  Snatches of their songs went something like this:

              Johnny get your gun, get your gun, get your gun,

              Take it on a run, on a run, on a run,

              Make your daddy proud of you, and your own red, white and blue.

              Over there, over there, send a word, say a prayer,

              For the Yanks are coming, their hearts are strumming,

              The drums are drumming everywhere.

              .... We're going over ....

             And we won't be back till it's over over there.

 h ^ Ineverylittle church house in everv litt^ town farewell parties were

 bo^'l^H. lre town gathered for the farewe11 P^ty "hen the first solSer

 boys left Hurricane.  Sweethearts and mothers were in tears.  I remember

 Josephine Spendlove, Mattie Segler and Annie Workman, sweethearts of Elmer Wood

 Pen Spendlove and Claude Hirschi.  Ihe girls were dressed in^neer blouses,    T

 and their lacy camisoles with tiny pink or blue ribbon bows showed through  They

 make^oSr? c t0 ^ .rnlrough their smiles' ^ shed ^ enough ^ars^o7

 make the occasion sweet and sad and I got a lump in my throat.  The following two

 :?m2 a^erward9:^ ^———^ ^ my mind' because we ———— ———^

             Goodbye means the birth of a teardrop.

             Hello means the birth of a smile.

             Over high garden wall, the sweet echoes fall

             As a soldier boy whispers goodbye.

             Smile awhile, you kiss me sad adeiu.

             When the clouds roll by I'll come to you.

             Then the skies will seem more blue

             Down in lover's lane, my dearie.

             Wedding bells will ring so merrily,

             Every tear will be a memory.

             So wait and pray each night for me

             Till we meet again.

                       SO LONG MOTHER

             So long my dear old mother, don't you cry.

             Come, kiss your grown up baby boy goodbye

            Somewhere in France I'll be dreaming of you,

            You and your dear eyes of blue.

            Come, let me see you smile before we part

            ril throw a kiss to cheer your dear old heart.

            ^4 ^,^2^^s1^. -t v- -y.
so^ s.10^9 £Y^ r^r^^to s^r-" -

                                 -25-

                               CHAPTER 6

                                 (1918)

                               ARMISTICE

     In 1917 the Hurricane and LaVerkin towns bought water rights from Toquer-
ville and both towns began to look something like Northern France.  With
picks and shovels men dug trenches down every street.  But these were not
grim trenches like the ones in France.  These were happy ones where kids could
race, whooping and laughing and hollering, after the workers had gone home for
the day.  What fun we had, until it was discovered what a lot of dirt we were
knocking down for the men to shovel out again, then we were forbidden to play
in the trenches anymore.

     In the trenches wooden pipes with wire coiled around them were buried,
and by January 1918 water flowed through them.  We had a tap under the cherry
tree close to the kitchen door.  Up to this time we drank "cistern" water.
Papa owned a cistern in with Uncle Lew and Uncle Marion.  It was built just
below the canal.  It had boards over the top to keep kids and critters from
falling in, but every little while it had to be cleaned to get rid of polli-
wogs, snakes, snails and moss.  Cistern water was piped to the corral^and the
cow's trough was slide and green.

     With the new water system, our drinking water was no longer murky, but
crystal clear, and the taste took some getting used to.  People called it
"Toquer-Bloat."

     In January the entire school moved into a new school building.  In our
new class room we sang, "Good morning to you, good rooming to you.  We're all
in our places with bright smiling faces.  Oh, this is the way to start a new
day."  Then before our opening prayer. Miss Moody said, "Today we must give
special thanks for this lovely new class room."

     The new building was steam heated with silver painted radiators that
knocked and banged and sometimes  steamed   at the valves.  On an inside wall
in each room was an "air hole" next to the floor, big enough for a kid to
crawl into.  Oozing plaster, hardened between the laths in the air holes,
made a beckoning ladder where adventurous boys often vanished.

     The bell in the belfry rang exactly thirty minutes before marching time
and could be heard clear across town.  In the school yard, each grade had an
assigned spot to line up in double rows.  When the piano started playing "The
Stars and Stripes Forever", the littlest grade marched first.  We marched, one
line at a time,swiveling for a right angle turn, marching up the steps four
abreast, stepping on the bottom step with the right foot.  The Principal
clapped his hands calling, "Left, right, left right," and we never broke rank
until we were in our seats.  The names of those who got out of step were
jotted down and they marched in the awkward squad after school.

     In the spring, the locust trees that lined the sidewalk in front of the
schoolhouse hung sweet with clusters of white waxen blossoms.  At recess
time we greedily munched the flowers.  Green groceries in the store did not
exist.  The locust blossoms satisfied a craving,as did watercress.

     The pear trees in our front yard were a cloud of blossoms and bees.  I
loved to sit on the front porch holding our baby brother on my lap.  His curls
were honey colored ?   he had a round laughing face and his eyes were blue.
I'd pat out the soft folds of his white dress so people passing by would look

                                 -26-
over the picket  fence and say, "My, what a pretty baby!"

     On May Day everyone  went a Maying.  Happy picnickers  gathered with
their teams and wagons at Berry Springs^where high swings hung from the cotton-
wood trees by the pond.  Caterpillars, with furry backs rippling, crawled
merrily on the limbs, dropping their fat little bodies among the picnickers.
Shivering, blue-legged little girls in ringlets and pink, blue, yellow and
green mosquito netting dresses braided the colored streamers on  the May Pole.
May Day was often chilly?but always wonderful.

     Now that Hurricane had electricity,  we no longer heard the loud popping
of the gasoline engine which "ran the dynamo and created the juice" for the
operation of the picture show on Wednesday and Saturday nights.  Charlie
Petty built the new Star Theater, which opened in May 1918.

     I was wild about picture shows.  Since we seldom had nickels, if I
wanted to see a movie, I earned the ticket.  I passed handbills whenever
Charlie Petty would let me.  All of the shows were good, no matter how bad
they were.  There were the good guys and the bad guys.  If the bad guys didn't
repent they were punished.  Right prevailed.  The girls were pretty and the
men handsome.  Love triumphed.  Endings were happy.  Never was the audience
left with that oh-no-it-can't-end-that-way feeling.  Pictures were black and
white and silent.  When the words were flashed on the screen, grownups could
be heard all over the hall reading to the little ones.  A melodeon, a cross
between a player piano and an organ, rolled out background music during
the wild stampedes or gun fights.  A woman treaded the pedals as the roll of
music played.

     In the summer time I took for granted the hard work that Mama and my
older sisters did.  Mama dug ditches and put in the gardens, doing what Papa
would have done if he could have, and Annie and Kate milked the cows.  Perched
on their three-legged stools, one on each side of the cow, they milked to-
gether.  Annie scythed the green lucem, raking it in a pile, then plunging
the pitch fork into the heavy load, she'd swing it over her shoulders, looking
like a moving haystack as she went to the corral.  We each had our tasks to
do, but play was more fun to me than work.

     Playing with lantha and Vinona was so much fun.  lantha was clever at
making rag dolls.  Our rag doll families were cute and we had a technique
where we could make them without needle or thread, and even without scissors
if necessary.  We did need scissors for the silk scraps lantha furnished
from Aunt Mary's dressmaking.  Aunt Mary Campbell did custom sewing.

     It was no sin in my sight to make rag dolls first, then do my dishes
afterwards.  Neither Kate nor Annie saw it that way.  Kate shouted so persist-
ently for me to come downstairs one day that I shouted in exasperation,
"You're just old maids.  You ought to be married and have kids of your own to
boss.  When I'm as old as you are, I'll be married."  Kate was just thirteen.
All the rest of the summer she reminded me that I'd better get busy on my
trousseau.

     Dirty dishes and bossy sisters can never squelch childhood happiness.
My cousins were fun to be with.  Eating bread and milk and little green onions
up on the canal bank with them was the best kind of picnic.

     One day our curiosity about cigarettes spurred lantha and I into action.
Sitting on our woodpile, we rolled up fine cedar bark in catalog paper, stick-
ing it together with spit.  Holding a roll in my lips I struck a match and
sucked in my breath.  The flame went through the bark and the smoke up the

                                    -27-
badc of my throat behind my nostrils and eyes.  Choking and coughing, I
struggled for breath.  Tears streamed down my cheeks.  When I could breathe,
I looked at lantha^ and she was choking and coughing and tears streamed down
her face^too.  Oar curiosity was satisfied.

        One day, while Will Sanders from LaVerkin visited with Papa in our
yard, he took a plug of tobacco from his pocket and bit off a cud.  His eyes
crinkled with pleasure and he made a sucking sound through his teeth like he
was slurping watermelon juice.  Expertly he spat in the dust)then chewed some
more.  Watching his face I thought how wonderfully good chewing tobacco must
be.  Papa kept a box of "horseshoe" plug tobacco in the grainery for sick
cattle.  When no one was looking, I took the box from the shelf.  The tobacco
was fresh and moist and biting off a hunk was easy.  What a shock!  My mouth
burned and I spit and spit.  I had been deceived!

     Street lights added a new dimension to our lives.  On summer evenings,
after the supper dishes were done, we played barefooted in the squishy dust
that was fluffy as talcum in the wagon rutted road.  We never played further
away than our own comer street light, within the range of Papa's voice when
he called us in for family prayer.  How good it was to pause in our play and
run across the front porch, pressing our faces against the screen door to
see Mama and Papa.  They were always there.  Sometimes Mama chorded on the
organ and Papa sang "The Bowery", "Rosy Nell" or "Sweet Birds, Oh Say That My
Lover is True."

     One evening as lantha and I played together, a girl from across town came
along.  "Will you kids walk home with me?" she asked.

      "I can't;' I answered, "it's too late.  It would be dark before we got
back home."

      "That's why I want you to go with me.  It will be dark before I get home
and I'm scared."

      "Ah,come on," lantha said,"let's take her home."

     "I can't," I protested.

     "If both of you go, then you won't have to come back alone," the girl
pleaded.

     "Nope, I can't," I insisted.

     "All right, don't you do it then," she retorted, "but I'll tell you one
thing.  If you don't, the devil will get you."

     "He won't really, will he?" I asked.

     "He will really," she affirmed.  The girl was two years older than I, so
she should know.

     Even the mention of the devil's name scared me.  I had the urge to run
in the house quick but the girl was saying,"The devil will really get you and
you won't ever see your Mama again."

     That did it.  I said, "We'd better hurry and take her home."

     Holding hands, the three of us ran.  Dusk turned into thick black velvet
as we scooted through the tunnel of trees up her lane.

     As we got to her gate and said,"Goodnight," she pulled us to her.  "Be-
cause you had to be coaxed and didn't come with me when I first asked you,
the devil is going to get you anyway," she said.  "He won't get you until'the

                                  -28-
first night you sleep  away from home.  Not unless you tell somebody that I
told you this.  If you tattle, he'll get you that night."  With that express-
ion of gratitude for our protection, she ran into her house, and we sped
terrified through the darkness to home.

     As I slipped quietly into the welcome light of the living room. Papa
said,"This is a fine time to be coming home," then went on jouncing Willie
on his knee and singing,"A chicken went to bed but it was no use, roll Jordan
roll."

     Grandma was reading the Deseret News and shaking her head and saying,"Tsk,
tsk, tsk, what a shame."  Mildred was playing with the paper dolls we had cut
out of the Montgomery and Sears catalogs, and asked me to play with her.  She
played with the ones that didn't have any feet, and with the black and white
ones and let me play with the slick, colored ones.  Things seemed all right
as long as the family was around and the lights were on, but after prayers,
everyone went to bed.  Then the terrifying  prediction came back to me and I
realized that all the days of my life I would never be able to leave Hurricane
because my first night away from home would be my last one on earth.  Burying
my head under the covers I finally slept.

     In the brightness of day I was able to dismiss the grim promise, until
one of my sisters mentioned going to Springdale, then the torment within me
became intolerable.  I hoped Uncle Lewis wouldn't bring his grist to the mill
until fall, because if he did, he'd probably invite Mildred and me to return
to Springdale with him.  But something just as worrisome happened.  Papa
planned a family vacation to Moccasin to see Aunt LaVem Heaton's family.
Moccasin was in Arizona.  We'd never been out of Utah.  My sisters were as
tickled as if Moccasin had streets of pure gold.  I wasn't tickled, I was
scared.

    Mama hummed while she baked mountains of cookies and bread,and everyone
was busy and happy helping get ready to go.  I helped, but I wasn't happy.
lanthus Spendlove drove to our house in Uncle Ren's wagon and our bedding
and grub box were loaded in.    I knew that this was the very last day of my
life.

     I didn't have to go with the family, but if I didn't, I'd have to tell
why, and that would be tattling,and that would be the end.  I might as well
go along and enjoy the remainder of my life.

     It was good to be perched upon a pile of bedding with the other kids.
We chattered and giggled, guessing what we'd find around each bend of the
road.  Far across the open stretches, gray forms raced with the wind.

     "Are they wolves?" I asked.

     "No, they are tumbleweeds," Papa replied.

     Later we came to where they were piled high in a barbed wire fence.
Ahead was a mountain as blue as Pinevalley Mountain.

     "Will we go over that mountain?" I asked.

     "Tomorrow," Papa answered.

     Oh,dear!  If only I were going to be alive tomorrow I could see what the
rocks on a blue mountain looked like.  They must be made of blue glass  I
could gather my lap full of them and take them home to Venona and lantha.  My
heart ached with regrets and I became engulfed in a tide of misery.

     At sundown Papa said it was time to pitch camp.  lanthus brought the

                              -29-

  team to a halt off the side of the road and took off their harnesses, rubbing

  their sweaty flanks as they snorted with satisfaction.

      We ate our supper around the campfire,then made a wide family bed on a

  canvas on the ground.  After we were all tucked in I lay listening to the

  contented sounds of the horses and the chirping of crickets! ^ emotion?

  swung like a pendulum between fleeting surges o? happiness and mLS? T

  loved sleeping under the stars and the sounds of the night.  Nothing could

  me ^ST ^   ?>, ;r,Inylast hour °" earth-  I studied the dark ^hes around

  ^and  ^ hat lurking behind one of tha" was the bad "^ siting for

  everyone to go to sleep so he could get me.  I felt sorry for the family0

  oT^^Tcasin-w;^ m:' happened t0 roe- and they wus be sad as the^

      This was the zero hour!

  ^ -^e-wh^alTof^^^   ^.rmake-anT^^^

  ^l^T-^^^^^^^^      bles^ ^Sd^y^ the

 wouS Vision3 pa    nonsense- ^ ^^ to bed and get to sleep." ^Mama

      "Mama, the devil is going to get me tonight," I whispered.

      "Of course he isn't," she said hugging me.

      "Oh,yes he is," I insisted.

      "Who told you that?" she asked.

     I blurted out the whole miserable tale to her

 ^ v^^r^^^ ^: sr"grt uttle girls-

     "But that would be tattling."

     "It isn't tattling to talk to your mother."

     "Do you mean I will still be alive tomorrow and that I can go to Moccasin?"

 the HeaveS^athe^Siralw0^? ? T" bed say your pca^3'  Relaemb^
^rS'^sySSS^ •-"•K-"- ?;;-.'-
;=^-ssssSS,S2-suss ^^s

                                                  •S^
between.                      Y •PP63" "'a* ™Y because of the atmosphere In
^"See^f^6 toS:seaBin? t° °1^. between the low hills,
blurping like little S; ^tlss^pr3|ags bubbled °«t °f th' "Mte sand,
s^house ^ the Ml^Te-an^-^.se^Son^ n^f ^ b^

    -Story  "Mama and the Heavenly Father" Relief Society Magazine July '62

                                -30-

  of all was the reservoir with a boat on it.  We'd never seen a boat before

  We'd never even seen enough water to hold a boat.

      Around the reservoir were clumps of water willows.  Standing on the bank.

  I watched the Moccasin boys push out from those willows on planks.  Their

  feet were spread apart, balancing themselves, as they pushed with long,

  slender poles. Enviously I watched them skim across the water.  I knew I

  could do it too, and I begged them to let me try, but they said I was too

  ft „'  s0 I watched "y chance,and when everyone was gone, I ran to where

  the boards lay in the shallow water.  Climbing on one, I spread my feet apart

  and balanced myself as the boys had done, and with a pole, I pushed out onto

  the pond.  There was an ecstatic moment of smooth, glistening water under me

  as I floated graceful as Hiwatha.  Then came a shout from a boat rowing out

  f^h ^   ^*. "w11 drown1" The SPlashing of tee oars rocked my plank

  as the boat pulled alongside,                                               ^-••c"^

      "Get in," lanthus Spendlove demanded.

      The moment I lifted a foot to step in, the plank scooted from under me,

  ^diL^ bl^berin9to tee mossy bottom. I knew nothing about swimmSg, so

  I didn't even try.  Thoughts flashed rapidly through my head.  I would drown

 £n^ r^?/ ^ee Hurricane or veaorla ^ lantha again.7 They woul^cry S my'

 bobbS   ?^f glu?* glurkt down* down I went- I was surprised Sen I

 TneSaS ^SY ^ ^ Ianthus caught my ski^ Puling me into the boat.

 The grace and beauty of my venture had turned to awkward misery as I was

 we^cStSr"?-^ t^"'3 houseT water weeda bringing from^y hairTnd my

 wet clothes clinging to me.  A trail of kids tagged, following me riaht into

 ^oofhT? ^^ where she let down the oyen door t°^n me! SStraged,

 boys and S?1687 shivering as she stri^ me "^ed in front of everyone9

 as th^^TT^"^11'^3;0"* z was showered ^te such tender affection I felt

 t" ^my'p^es^en^^^^^        Goodness1  -———— I have ——————g

      The day Grandma gave me lOd: so I could ride in a car to the flour mill

 I never dreamed that some day there would actually be car owners in Hurri- *

 cane, but Dr. Wilkinson bought one.  And then Walter Stout bought a car

 and finally Ira Bradshaw, making three cars in Hurricane.  Brother Bradshaw

 said a car couldn't have come to Hurricane until the convicts made a road,

 taking out the rocks and patching over the sand at the Black Ridge

 £S

 E•£—•=••>-is^2"&•^;«?•,:•„£"i:.r•
~..~;•.•S•.•"?£^,y-".^5^ as;~.r--,^£,-; —
•Story "Baptism is a Family Affair" published in the Nov. 1977 Friend

                                 -31-
around the bend through the sun-splotched shade of the willows, as far as
our cistern.  Joyfully we splashed, feeling the security of our rumps bump-
ing along the sandy canal bottom.  Or we'd crawl  upstream  walking on our
hands while we kicked a jet stream with our feet.  This was the canal version
of the "Virgin River Crawl."  To us this was real swimming, and could be done
in as little as one foot of water.

     In August, when the peaches were cut and spread on planks to dry, the
pits were saved to make carbon for gas masks.  All of our nation's industries
were thrown into the war effort.  Even our dinner tables were supposed to
feel the effects, but the only awareness I had of this was verbal.  We were
urged to eat less so we could send more to our soldiers.  Recipies for egg-
less, sugarless cakes and for all kinds of substitutions were published.
Mama  already knew all about substitutions.  She could make something out
of nothing.  Women knitted socks, mittens and sweaters, and all of our wool
scraps were made up into quilts to send  overseas.  We chanted a jingle that
came from the Deseret News.  I've forgotten the words, but it went something
like this:

     My beds they are sheetless, my stockings are feetless,

     My pants they are seatless today.

     My meals they are meatless, my food it is sweetless,

     I'm getting more eatless each day.

"Oh., how T lia-l-o -H-io Va i o Q»- t "

There were a number of verses, each one ending with "Oh, how I hate the Kaiser!

     The scream of mortar shells became real and telegrams bearing sad news
began reaching home.  The heart of the nation was reflected in their music,

 like the plaintive song:

      I've heard the prayers of mothers, some of them old and gray.

     I've heard the prayers of others, for those who went away.

     Oft times a prayer will teach one, the meaning of goodbye.

     I've felt the pain of each one, but this one made me cry.

                             Chorus

     Just a baby's prayer at twilight, when lights are low,

     Poor baby's years are filled with tears.

     There's a mother there at twilight, who's proud to know,

     Her precious little tot, is dad's forget-me-not.

     After saying,"Goodnight Mama," she climbs up stairs,

     Quite unawares and says her prayers:

      "Oh, kindly tell my daddy that he must take care."

     That's a baby's prayer at twilight, for her daddy "over there."

     The wonderful women  who went overseas to tend the wounded, inspired
the song:

     There's a rose that grows in No Man's land,

     And it's wonderful to see.

     Tho' it's sprayed with tears, it will live for years

     In life's garden of memory.

     It's the one red rose the soldier knows.

     It's the work of a master's hand.

     'Mid the war's great curse, stands the Red Cross Nurse.

     She's the rose of No Man's land.

     The first of September my sisters and I went to the dry farm with Paoa
and Whit Spendlove to gather corn.  Papa drove the wagon down tne rows anFwe
pulled the ears and threw them in.  At night we slept on the floor of the

                                  -32-

  little camp house.  I was on the outer edge of the bed and the covers  didn't

  reach.  The floor was hard, the night cold,and coyotes howled.  My aching,

  freezing bones, the eeriness of the mournful howling,and the weird shadows

  cast by the moonlight was combined misery, terror, and tingling joy of adven-

  ture.  In a happy sort of way I suffered.

      At home the corn was piled in front of the barn and we shucked it.  How

  good it was ^ to dump last years dilapidated corn husks from our shuck ticks and

  fill them with fresh ones.  The first night sleeping on a newly filled shuck

  tick is exotic.  The crisp shucks crunch and crackle and the sweet aroma of

 the corn field fills the room, making sleep serene.

      I skipped to the first day of school in my new blue dress, and Edith in

 her pink one.  Mama said my eyes were bluer when I wore blue, and Edith's

 cheeks were pinker when she wore pink.  I yearned for a pink dress.  Edith

 was pretty even when she was angry, for then the colored part of her eyes were

 all pupil  black as coal.  Her hair was the color of fresh wheat straw and hung

 in fat, shining braids over her shoulders.

      Bemice Gates was our second grade teacher and she was far above the human

 race, like an angel.  I had disdainfully accepted the younger kids in our class

 because two of them. Ray Bradshaw and LuWayne Wood, were almost the smartest

 ones in the room.

      lantha and I were playing upstairs in our northwest bedroom on a Sunday

 ?ne1£?^- "^ ST^ 1918)- As we dressed our rag dolls* we talked ab^

 S8?18     f Germans. Then something struck the roof like a gun shot.

 Startled, we ran to the window.  Then came another bang, and another.  "The

 2"^"^ skoot^ atus'" I cried- As the din became a deafening roar,

 we saw hail stones as big as peach pits peppering the ground.  Because we

 ^Sst3^ S1;?0"8' wen this terrible storm seenled GerTOa" sent- With the

 first lull, lantha ran home.  Soon she was back, her face drained of all color.

      "Eldon Workman just got killed," she breathlessly exclaimed.

 pall s^Sed^v^m::'3 brother-  The sky hung low and gloom^  A -1-choly

      "Come and see where he died," lantha said.

      Trembling, I took her hand and we pattered down the muddy street to the

 weidSTat^he ^ thetran-^ on it, by Petty.s store.7 ^Se sot?

 Se ha5 stS J^-  ^pole was the outllne where Eldon had ^llen.

 score ^   S^ny mi^T^    he power and Eldon had climbed the P016 to re-

 score it.  In my mind,he too was a World War casualty.

 who ^ "^.reported thousands who were killed in France and thousands more

 who died of disease or were wounded.  Our country was brounhl- ^ hJ.^

 President Wllson asked the nation to fast andpray'or peace!  That fast "day
Sno a: ^'M?7 of^ l±fe' we had B1^ fasted on fa^ ^ buTno^o
and th8 t^'       said we could eat after the sun went dow".  I ^ s^arvS
and the setting sun hung for hours just above the peach trees  before it
finally sunk out of sight.  Not too long after this", the ArSsUce was signed

                               2 S?.=S-?:.--2-S.».-
s sa is-E,s.—^^HSSr:-S£"'

                                  -33-

  car in France,and at 11:00 a.m. on  November 11, 1918, the news that the war

 -was over was flashed around the world.  The United States and all of tne

  S^S1"1^^^6^2"^^- In Hurricane the chw^ bell rang continuously

  for hours, and the few car owners honked and honked their horns.  People

  cheered and whistled shrill glad whistles.  Soon after that our soldier boys

  returned home.                                                            —

  on^ S^-^1861^^ scar- Not an of the ^ caJ"e "^e, ^ all of the

  SSJSS ^T^  : ^ badc- The big scar we felt was the ^"ish

  T^T n Itbroke out flrst in ^oPe but had reached America by the fall

  of 1918.  By the last of October the.-church had closed its temples7 The

  schools, churches and show halls were closed.  The only public gathering in

  Hurricane was the crowd outside of the post office at Aunt Molly Hall's.

  ^ ^e S  was sorted she handed ±t out the window as each Person stepped

  onF^  S^T More gauze raas]cs- Anyone caught on the ^eets without

  Se kSchS'SS  ^rest- "ama kept a pan of Lysol water on the back of

  •^    7 ^   gau2e masks silnmered. and she kept a stack of fresh

  S^.    I for us t0 wear when we went down toMn- The only place we

  didn't wear masks was around home or when we climbed the hill by oursSvS.

 loneliness ^ur3^1?? was long and.lonely•  In spite of Lysol, isolation and

 loneliness, our family came down with the flu.  We lay sick all over the livina

 bed".^ we could^ near the fire- The lounge WM Pulled °ur?or a douS^

 bed and there were beds on the floor.  If Mama got sick we didn't know it

 because she moved among us constantly, administering water, soup. mS^d plast-

 ers and a cool hand on hot foreheads.  Pood was terrible.  The teste af d^S,

 stuck in our throats, and a black dizziness flattened us when we?rLd to s^

 up or walk.  Many people died.  In some towns there were noFenough wen

 wS? di^.?T  r the sidc- The epidelnic was s0 severe that generaSy the

 o^deSS^   e ^among the sick- ltowev^ there were many herSc sLrles

 cno^^   ne;9^ wh0 toolc the risk- Men in ^-ricane and LaVerkin

 ^SS  ^ f milked and fed ttecoMS and did ^l^de chores fart^ir sick

 ^l^v3^ ? ^r6 instances* ^e "an took care of a dozen sick households

 ^hina^feedS;^ T^ items t0 their doors- some women -ent ?nt° homes

 bathing, feeding and cleaning and they seemed blessed and protected for thi-

 :V^ oT^SS1"aara Jones-dled the last of^^. w-^

 ;^.^^S^'H-o""s;:"~••!•s•"s^"I
» «'S,"£."33:.2,'££°;;."',S?»S,'".S- ?"— "•"'•
ss;:s?ssnl^
parties because they wore pillow stuf^and'nad'women's vo^3 ^ primary
deSgh^I s^as^ haTe^wn'werT^ become.more -PP-ciative. The .ost
Segler.  But they e^, wear^nSs.     ' ^P^lly Edna Gubler and Geneva

                                 -34-

      Christmas Eve, a neighbor left a little pine tree on our front porch.  We

  didn't always have a tree, because we couldn't go after our own.     when we

  did have one it couldn't be decorated until after supper, because it had to be

 set up in the middle of the table.  The decorations were polished apples,

 strings of popcorn,and small twisty candles clipped to the tips of the branches

 with metal candle holders.  Christmas morning Mama lit the candles.  (Pine

 needles are flammable, and the candles had to be lit with care.)  We admired

 the tree breathlessly and briefly, then the candles were blown out, the tree

 untrlmmed and taken out so we could set the table for breakfast.

      Our gifts were never wrapped, but spread out on the lounge like items in

 a bazaar.  Usually there was one gift apiece, and spread out this way they looked

 more abundant.  This year I got a doll, the first talking doll I had ever seen.

 Grandma's silk bosomed friend Alice Therriot from Salt Lake City sent it to me

 because my name was Alice.  The doll had a bisque head, hands and feet on a cloth

 body.  A sound box in her middle made a sound like "mama" when I tipped her for-

 ward.  Her cheeks were rosy and she wore a mischievous Kewpie grin. Her pink

 dress was lace trimmed and I loved and adored her.  Up to now I had only had a

 Polly.  A Polly was a cloth doll, the features, dress and all stamped on percale,

 then cut out, sewed and stuffed.  Her arms were separate enough to get hold of

 and eventually ripped in the armpits and her stuffing oozed out, but usually she

 lasted until summer.

      Santa CLaus  belonged strictly to the world of make-believe.  We were aware

 of Mama's struggle to get us a gift apiece.  Still no one loved playing make-

 believe more than we did.  We enjoyed Christmas as much as our friends did who

 tightly guarded the secret of Santa.

      "The saddest day of my life," Mama once said, "was the Christmas when I was

 twelve.  Father hadn't returned from his peddling trip and Mother was sick.  We

 got up Christmas morning to total bleakness.  There was no sign of Christmas -

 nota ^^^^T" s^ °^ g^t ^ anything. Heartbroken I went to Mother's

 room. 'Annie; she said. 'if you'll look on the bottom shelf of the cupboard, you'll

 SeS.^ ^ ^ "V tin pai1- z intende<i t0 make more* but didn't do ^u'

 Searching, I found a few burned molasses cookies.  Mother told us that day who

 Santa Claus  really was, and that he didn't come down from the North Pole with

 his reindeers.  This came as a terrible shock and I grieved for days.  I felt as

 such'a Sinc^a ^ ^^  T resolved right then that T wuid ne^ do

 sucn a cning to a child of mine."

     One mystery we could never solve was where the pan of animal cookies came

  i         ^^.^h-hapes^^^^^^^

 S kTd-oTc^es1.00^; our- searching ^ough bo-ho^es^ev^v^
the cookie cutters. •  If Santa wasn't real, at least his e?ves were! revealed
create ^^t ofmyste^ lent such fascination that Mildred and I decided to
create a little mystery of our own.  Edith and LaPriel were our gullible victims
^Sl^^0—^^^^^^  -fe." S:
"so he'S^SSe ^hrou^r'ho!:0'^'" we told our u^ ^er,
^Siceptically Edith shook her head. but I^riel.s eyes grew wide with excite-
^ ^^^Thr^ ^r^^—

                                    -35-

      "Santa has a work shop up there, you'll see," I said.

      Concealed in Mildred's pocket were two strips of fleecy flannel, one red

 and one white.  "We'll climb up there and ask Santa Claus  to stick his hand

 out of the hole so you can see it," Mildred said.

      Like lizzards we climbed the door, hoisting ourselves into the dark manhole.

 Creeping back on the timbers above the lath and plaster I said,"Hello Santa GLaus

 what are you doing up here?"

      Making her voice deep as possible, Mildred replied "I'm getting ready to pop

 corn."                                                                             -

      Rapidly both of us clapped our hands.  "Can you hear the corn popping?" I

 yelled.

      "Yes," LaEriel answered.

      The popping stopped because we had to arrange the flannel on Mildred*s arm

 putting on the red first and then a white cuff around her wrist.               y

      "Santa, reach out your hand so Edith and LaPriel can see you," I said.

      Mildred stuck her arm out and LaPriel shouted,"I can see it, I can see it!"

      The attic was dark and eerie.  We had mystified our sisters, so we were glad

 to scramble down.  LaPriel was charmed but Edith was dubious.

                                  CHAPTER 7

                              I TRY TO SEE FROM

                             PAPA'S POINT OF VIEW

                                   (1919)

      Papa was the water tax collector and the stray pen keeper, and our meals were

 constantly interrupted with people paying taxes or being mad because someone had

 put their animals in the stray pen.  We ate in the front room and I felt self-

 conscious about people looking on, because there were so many of us around the big

 table.  I wished we had fancy food to show off like strawberry shortcake.  But at

 least Mama always saw to it that we had a fresh white table cloth on, and we set
a full table, even if we were only eating bread and gravy.

      It undoubtedly wasn't easy for Papa to provide for so many of us, but generally
he was cheerful.  But when he voiced his frustrations , it threw a pall of gloom
over me.

      "I guess we might as well buy our caskets while we've got the money " he re-
marked one day. "We could put them in the cellar to store dry beans l^71
anri TA f^11^^0^1,1."1^   Mama sent me to the cellar to get a bottle of fruit
and I stood in the dim light, visualizing ten caskets, including Grandma's, side
by side on the dirt floor.  I would have to crawl over them all the rest of my

 ^°^\ t thi?3 Mama sent me after- The dry beans we ^PP^ froln them would
eventually be turned into skeletons  -  our skeletons!

     Another thing that scared me was the terrible song they sang in church about
s^T^ernoon"^ SS son?^"-Batars ^ga11- Noth^ -id^ST
So..,.?01"'*?"8 S"""? ^•"^ vwls ^"y "e and I would wake up tingling
So«etu.es I wandered in ay sleep, bunping into things.  Papa slept wltn b"Si «u-<
wide open.  A cat couldn.t even sue* through our garden ln\he 5gS »l£out°S

                                    -36-
hearing it.  With the first touch of my foot to the floor he'd shout,"Alice, get
back to bed."

      "I am in bed," I'd whimper.

     "You are not," he'd yell.

     His yelling confused me and I didn't know where my bed was.  Agitated, I'd
crouch in one of the little windows under the eaves, fumbling at the screens,
hoping to get away from the sound of his voice.  Mama had seen to it that the
screens were solidly nailed in place.  After so much shouting  Papa finally
awoke me, the room came into focus, and I crawled back into bed.

     A fun pastime to me was drawing pictures, and I thought I was pretty good.
I especially liked my drawing of a fat girl with a butterfly net, so I submitted
it to The Juvenile Instructor.  When it was published I was practically launched
into an artist's career.  My prize for the drawina was a beautifully illustrated
book "Through the Looking Glass" or "Alice in Wonderland" by Lewis Carroll.  wha+-
a thoughtful editor to send me a story of Alice.  Often I was called "Alice In
Wonderland" and I liked it because it justified my many flights of fancy, like
the day lantha and I found the egg upon the hill.

     We were playing among the chaparrals when we found what appeared to be an
ordinary looking chicken egg under a bush.  Now what would ever possess a chicken
to climb the hill to lay an egg?

     "Maybe it's a turtle egg," lantha suggested.

     "Or an alligator egg," I said.  "Let's take it home and hatch it and see
what comes out of it."

     Taking turns, we carried our treasure down the hill, and our speculations
grew more vivid and exciting each step of the way.  We followed the road, for
climbing over rocks might break the egg.

     "What if it is a dragon egg?" lantha asked.

      "Or it might be a prince that some witch has turned into an egg," I added.

 "If we break the egg then we'd break the spell,and the Prince would be so happy
he'd grant us all our wishes."

     We had reached the Lombardy poplar trees at Workman's comer by now.  I was
holding the egg.  My imagination had reached such a pitch that I could stand it
no longer.

      "I'm going to break the egg," I said firmly.

      "No,don't!  Little snakes might run out of it."  lantha jumped back as I
whacked the egg against a fence post.

     I emptied the shell upon the ground.  If a genie had spiraled into the sky
we would not have been more surprised than we were to see only a firm, yellow yolk
surrounded by clear egg white.  We came back to reality with a thud! •

     In the summertime, suppertime came before sundown, and it was easy to play
outside too long.  Once when LaPriel came in after the supper table had been
cleared. Papa said,"LaPriel, stay out of the pantry."  Oh no, I thought, he isn't
going to make her go without supper.  She had played so hard and must be awfully
hungry.  I wished I had some little thing to give her, but I didn't.  All of our
food was kept either in the pantry or the cellar, and the same door led to both!

     »Story "A Piteous Day" published in the May, 1969 Relief Society Magazine.

                                 -37-

 Holding my breath,I expected her to cry, but instead she turned and went out

 the kitchen door.  Pretty soon she returned with a loaf of bread.  Seeing it,

 Papa shouted,"LaPriel, I told you not to eat.  Now put that bread back in the

 pantry."

      "You didn't tell me not to eat," she wailed,"you only told me to stay out

 of the pantry."

      "Then how did you get that bread?" he demanded.

      "From Aunt Mary Stout," she replied.

      "You march right back to Aunt Mary's with it," he ordered.

      Obediently she returned the loaf and went to bed without supper.

      Aunt Mary Stout's was the logical place for her to go.  We were always as

 much at home there as we were in our own home.  We took Venona and Leah as for

 granted as though they were our sisters.  Aunt Mary treated us like we were her

 own.  When Uncle Marion's wagon trundled down the dusty dugway  coming home from

 Rattlesnake, we ran along with Aunt Mary's children to meet him.  We knew there

 would be biscuits in the wooden grub box fastened to the side of his wagon.

 Dry biscuits with the exotic flavor of dry farm dust.

     Another time when LaPriel came in from play after supper was over. Papa

 said^'Mama, pack her things and let her go find another place to live.  If

 she wanted to live with us, she'd come in on time."

      I don't think Mama wanted to do it, but she always cooperated with Papa.

 Quietly she tied a little dress and a night gown in a dish towel and handed it

 to LaPriel.  My heart almost broke as LaPriel's little face crumpled with un-

 happy tears.

      "Now go on," Papa ordered.

     An aching misery swept through me as I watched her clutching the

 bundle in her arms and sobbing as her little bare feet trudged out the front

 gate.  Slowly she walked outside the picket  fence, her head bowed, then some

 bushes screened her from my view.  I ran across the yard to Grandma Isom's
house and up the stairs.  From the south bedroom window I could still see her.
Near the end of the fence hung a loose picket with only one nail in the top
LaPriel pried it back and crawled through.  At the end of the raspberry row
was the wooden box our organ had come in, which we used for a playhouse.  La-
£o  ^^"E ln Y^ of it' her face buried in her bundle, crying. I cried

     Brother Roundy and his family lived through the block from us.  In the
spring time  when he was plowing, we used to crawl through the fence, racina
over the fresh turned, soil.                                           ' ^^19

   ^  "Tell us a story. Brother Roundy," we would beg.  He'd tie the horse's
reins  to the plow handle and sit in the furrow with us and tell us "iniun"
stories from the Book of Mormon.
..-^"i^ °ther talents too. He could charm a toothache away or buy our
warts for a nickel and make them disappear
^5 ^-^ S^S ^\y^T ^_

                                     -38-

 been to Cedar before.  The road over the Black Ridge was narrow, steep and

 rocky.  We were impressed with "dead-man's hollow" and a dream gold mine.  Every

 turn in the road came alive with Brother Roundy by our side.  Once over the

 ridge, the car coughed, sputtered, then died.  It was out of gas.

   Relieved, Brother Roundy sighed,"I' ve been praying for the past five miles that

 we could stop.  The gas feed was stuck and I couldn't slow down."

   We were probably doing at least twenty miles per hour.

   Karl went on foot to a ranch house across a scrub oak flat.  A light mist of

 rain began to fall, so Brother Roundy drew us into his arms and told us "imun"

 stories.  After awhile Karl returned with a quart bottle of gas he had found in

 a ranch house.  Lifting the hood he poured it into the carburetor.  The car

 sputtered and shook,but that was all.

   Brother Roundy sniffed at the empty bottle.  "Coal oil," he said.

   Again Karl hiked through the brush.  It was dusk when he returned with a white

 horse.  With a rope they hitched it to the car, and the horse pulled us on to

 Ren Roundy's ranch house.  "Ren's playhouse," they called it, because it was so

 sind±.L •

   Ren and his sisters Reva, Reba,and Anise were there.  They fed us sour dough

 biscuits and fried mutton and bedded us down. Five of us slept cross-wise on one

 bed.  The night was long, cold and crowded.  The next morning the horse pulled

 the car on to Kanarra.

   T^11^.1?^'3 oldest dau9hter. ^Bh Sylvester, fixed breakfast for us and

 combed Edith's and my long, tangled hair.  She kept sending me to the ditch to

 dip the comb until she got us braided slick for the rest of our journey   The

 round trip to Cedar took us three days, mostly just chugging along.

 in1. S6/3^^ ^^ Mama dig the carrots' ^^P3 ^d Parsnips and put them

 in a straw lined pit covered with boards.  She gave us some to sell so we could

 rS"^ ?   "T^ BY ped61i^ t0 the neighbors, selling my vegetables for 5<c

 a}^1 I earned 30<. Feeling rich, I skipped to the drug store and bought six

 ?^r 0^ gum'    ter I got outsidet a feeling of guilt overpowered me. I nad

 squandered my money, not even saving 3<t for tithing, so I returned the gum.

 t^i1 mea^ ^e we^ back t0 sc:h001 again- Jean blister was my third grade

 teachero  What a china doll she was with her ivory skin, black hair and prett?

 SorSnt.       g that a kid had t0 look at the teadler a11 d^ thifwas7

  ^ ups?irsroom sherented in ^e Isom Hotel had an east window above the
^ Tl'^ ^OWY saturda^ ^"^"g, as I pattered along the sidewalk in
front of Potty's store, I saw her looking out of her open window.  Below her
in the rose garden, Irving Isom scooped up a snowball, hurling it into her
window, splattering her with snow.  She screamed, and he laughed,and I stood
transfixed watching the love scene.  Soon all of'the third grade'knew tnaFLing
loved Jean.  She was my romantic ideal until one fateful morning.
^After S0 openin<f, excises, she said, "Everyone turn to the left and put your
IS                         S,:T~-"K"'

  The kids tittered and my eves smai-f-pr! in'-i-h c. i .c
sloppy .ee. ^ ^ ^eS! ^1^^°^"^ ^ -

                                     -39-
buttons where there should have been eight.  That night I not only sewed on the
buttons but turned a stove lid upside down, and with spit and a rag I sooted my
shoes.  And Miss McAllister became a human being in my sight from that day on.

     Threshing time was a highlight of autumn and we hailed with excitement the
day it was our turn.  Frank Reber had cut our field of wheat and stacked the tied
bundles in the barnyard.  When we heard the clatter of the threshing machine com-
ing in at the barnyard gate, my sisters and I raced through the peach orchard to
watch.  We perched on the woodpile with the neighborhood youngsters who tagged
along.

     The men on the thresher set the blower so the straw would go under the north
shed of the barn.  After the shed was filled, the blower was turned to go over
the top, where the straw piled higher and higher until it almost buried the barn.
How shiny, slick and slidy it looked, a continuous slope from the peak down into
the yard,almost to the bellflower apple tree.

      After the thresher and its crew had left and Papa had returned to the house,

 our playmates lingered.  What a golden day.  Golden sunshine, golden peach trees,

 golden poplars along the sidewalk,and a shining golden straw stack beckoning

 with golden opportunity.  It was too much.  Like soldier ants we crawled in a

 continuous stream up to the top of the barn.  From there we tumbled and slid all

 the way to the bottom, compacting the airy straw solidly beneath us, creating a

 slick chute for the endless stream of laughing, shouting youngsters.   Exhilarat-

 ing 1  It was the epitome of happiness, a happiness too great to endure, for above

 the squeals of laughter came a loud, discordant voice.  Instantly we were hushed

 as Papa loomed like a giant before us.  The last kid silently slid to the bottom

 of the stack and there we stood in a contrite huddle.

      "I won't have you kids  wallowing  my straw stack down.  Get a march on,

 everyone of you^ and come right out of there," he demanded.

      The only way out was through the little gate where he stood.  One by one we

 meekly filed past as Papa's heavy hand "tunked" us each on the head.  A "tunk"

 was Papa's version of a thump.  It was administered by the end of the three middle

 fingers coming down with a thud on the top of the head.  How mortifying!  I

 couldn't believe Papa would treat our friends the same way he did us.

      After we were all out of the enclosure and my friends had scampered home, I

 looked up at the golden straw stack.  How I wished Papa could slide down it, from

 the top to the apple tree just once.  If he knew the thrill of it, he'd ask all of

 our friends to come back.

      Fall was butchering time.  The big fat pig  that had been slurping our dish-

 water all summer, and that had greedily climbed up the side of the pen for the

 ears of corn, had become a personal acquaintance by now.  I had no particular

 love for him but I didn't want him killed,either.  When the black tub was steam-

 ing over the fire and the boards for scraping the pig were arranged over the saw

 horses and George Spendlove arrived, Mildred and I figured it was shooting time,

 so we ran down into the dark cellar and crouched on the floor with our fingers

 in our ears.  We didn't want to hear the fatal shot, but we kept one finger a

 little loose in one ear so we would know when it was safe to stop not listening.

      Our sentimental feelings were pretty much forgotten when the pig was no

 longer & creature that could look at us out of little mean eyes, but was simply

 sausage, bacon, head cheese or lard for making pies.  Nothing could be better

 than Mama's bottled sausage seasoned with sage.

      As Christmas approached, I rooted through the sacks of scraps and rags Mama

 had stored upstairs.  Rag bags and their doll making possibilities fascinated me.

                                     -40-
As I rooted  I ran onto two orange-colored glass bowls that glinted with a trans-
parent golden sheen.  Transfixed,! held them up to the light.  How beautiful they
were.  One was rounded in at the top like a crystal ball and the other had a
fluted top like a petunia.  My eyes were dazzled with their exquisite beauty.
Where did they come from, and who did they belong to I wondered.  Excitedly I
started from the room to show everyone what I had found, when Kate met me in the
hall.

      "Quick, take them back where you got them from," she whispered.

      "But guess where I found them?" I cried.

      "I know.  Annie and I hid them there," she answered.  "We bought them for
Mama for Christmas."

     The gleam of the colored glass stirred something inside of me. An enchantment
akin to what I felt as I read of Aladdin gathering rubies, diamonds, sapphires
and amethysts in the underground garden, or of Dorothy and her friends being

 dazzled by the brilliancy of the Emerald City in the land of Oz. And the enchant-

 ment has remained.  Always before, Christmas gifts to Mama had been useful, like

 stockings or an apron.  But ornamental glasst  What a surprisel *

                                   CHAPTER 8

                                In Which We Get

                                Another Brother

                                    (1920)

      Every day Papa walked to Dorty (George) Gibson's barber shop with his checker

 board rolled up in his back pocket.  This checkerboard, made of narrow slats on a

 canvas back, was a gift from Grandma to him when he was a boy and is a marvel to

 me to this day for its smoothness and fine finish, considering the years of con-

 stant use.  Dorty was the town barber and champion story teller.  His shop was a

 social center and Papa was the town's undisputed checker champion.  There was a

 satisfaction in being a champion's daughter.

      One day just before sundown. Papa came home to supper.  As he sat down to

 the table he took a pink celluloid bracelet from his pocket.

      "Oh Papa," I cried,"where did you get it?"

      "I found it on the sidewalk on my way home," he replied.

      "Can I have it?" I asked.

      "No, it belongs to the person who lost it."

      "But we don't know who lost it," I reasoned covetously.

      "But we must try and find out."

      "If we don't find out, then can I have it?"

      "Yes," he replied.

      "Some little girl is sad tonight because she lost her bracelet," Mama said.

      "I would be sad if it was mine and I lost it," I admitted.

      The next morning Papa told the principal of the school about the bracelet.

 What neither Papa nor Mama knew was that I had taken the bracelet from the cup-

 board.  I didn't own anything pink, and I wanted to wear it for just one day, so

 * Story "The Golden Bowl" published in the November, 1967 Relief Society Magazine

                                   -41-
I slid it above my elbow under the long sleeves of my brown dress.  I kept
touching it through my sleeve during the day, knowing how pretty it was,
even though I couldn't see it.  After school I put it back in the cupboard
just in time, because Stella Campbell came to claim it.

     Stella had everything pretty--  pink dresses, ribbons and beads. She
had all of the things I did not.  She even had Sunday shoes.  Not many girls
in town owned two pair of shoes.  But Stella deserved the bracelet, because
she missed a lot of fun that the rest of us had.  In the summertime when we
played in the big ditch under the mulberry trees east of Mae Potty's house,
Stella couldn't play in the mud with us.

     That ditch was as important to us as the beach is to people who live
by the ocean.  The clean, white sand from the canal seemed to build up at
this one spot, making the best ditch in town for mud houses and for making
little roads with spool wagons and for all of those wonderful things.
Stella used to stand on the ditch bank silently watching us.  She looked
like a boudoir doll with her pretty starched skirts ruffled above her lace
petticoats, and her crisp white collars and cuffs, and her hair shining
like silk.  A speck of dirt would not have dared get on her.  I felt like
she would have liked to crawl in the soft sand with us.  Naturally the pink
bracelet was much prettier on her arm than stuffed up under my brown sleeve.

     Easter morning Mama busied herself helping us get ready for Sunday
School, and then she suddenly disappeared.  Pretty soon Grandma came into
the kitchen and said,"The stork just brought you a new baby brother."

     "Grandma," I cried, "why weren't we outside to see the stork?"

     Grandma bustled back into Mama's bedroom oblivious to my question.

'Oh dear," I lamented,"we'11 never have a chance like this again.'

"Oh dear,"


     Grandma was a midwife and she delivered babies to lots of mothers.
She kept a black leather bag behind the marble-topped table in her parlor
that she used to deliver them with.  I had a hard time getting this straight
in my mind.  If Grandma delivered babies in her black bag, what business did
the stork have delivering them too?  Since she never answered me when I
asked, I had to draw my own conclusions.  Our third grade reader had a story
called "Tom and the Water Babies."  There were pictures of dozens of chubby,
curly headed babies swimming and playing among the water lilies.  The
babies with hair must have come from there and Grandma had carried them in
her bag.  The bald headed ones like Mama had must have been delivered by
the stork.  I wished I had seen the stork carrying our brother in his beak.

     They named the baby Clinton Floyd, and we loved him a lot.  In no time
at all he learned to laugh and his hair came in shiny and curly.

     Mama subscribed for the "Hearth and Home," a magazine filled with love
stories,  recipes, old time songs and poems and crochet patterns.  It cost
35(£ a year.   For selling three subscriptions, I could earn a birthstone
ring.  Getting the subscriptions was no problem to me, but waiting for the
ring to come was.  I watched the mail every day.  Finally the package arri-
ved.  In it was a little blue velvet box containing a gold ring that had a
sparkling red ruby stone.  My heart almost burst as I gazed into its depth.
Proudly I wore it, putting it in its case each night.  Then somehow, some-
where, I lost my treasure.  Promptly I got out and sold three more subscript-
ions for the magazine, earning a new ring.
-42-


      My success at getting a second ring impressed me with other luxuries

 that lay within my grasp.  A girl brought a Lee's Manufacturing Catalog to

 school and at recess a cluster of us pored over the list of premiums.  A

 pretty vanity case with a mirror in the lid was especially appealing.  Five

 of us decided to earn us each one, so we divided up the town, taking orders

 for dishes, pots and pans.

      We sold enough to earn our vanity cases, but we had a problem.  The

 order had to be sent in the name of an adult.  We really didn't want to

 discuss this with our parents for fear they would put a stop to our ven-

 ture.  Finally I volunteered Mama's name, and in our clumsy way, we sent

 the order off.  This time I didn't hail the arrival of our order with joy

 because I wasn't sure how Mama would take it.

      Well, I found out.  When Ira Bradshaw came with his freight truck

 from Lund and unloaded a fifty-gallon barrel in our yard. Mama and Papa

 were flabbergasted.

      "We haven't ordered anything," Mama said when presented with the

 freight bill.

      Scared as I was, I spoke.  "Mama, lantha, Nona and I and some other

 kids took orders for some dishes.  We thought you would like them to come

 to you."

      "You what?" she asked in a tone I'd never heard before.  "What did

 you say?"  She was shaking me as she spoke.

      "Load the barrel right back in your truck and return it," Papa de-

 manded.

      "Please," I begged.  "Can't we keep it?  There're pretty dishes in it

 that the people want."

      "Who is going to pay the freight?" Papa demanded.

      "The people will give us the money and we will pay it," I pleaded.

      "But the bill has to be paid right now and we don't have the money."
Papa reasoned.

     Mama's lips set tight, angry veins stood out on Papa's forehead,and
Brother Bradshaw looked embarrassed.  "I do have to collect the freiaht "
he said simply.                                                      -  '

     Silently Mama walked into the house.  Since it was safer to stay close
to her heels than to be alone with Papa, I followed.  She took a little
cream pitcher from the top shelf of the kitchen cupboard and dumped out
some nickels, dimes and quarters.  After counting them out, it took almost
all of them.

     "You'd better collect for these dishes right away, because this is
the money for the light bill," she said.

     I ran to tell the other kids the dishes were here.  We gathered to-
gether our crude records of who had ordered what.  Mama helped us take the
dishes from the excelsior packing, sorting them into little piles.  There
was an awful mixup in our bookkeeping and Mama scolded all of us.  Usually
she was quiet about everything, but this time she was mad as a setting hen.
It took her a few days to reconcile our orders and get us out to deliver

                                  -43-

 and collect.

      After it was all over, there was a stack of eight dinner plates and

 one big vegetable bowl, in an allover pattern of gold lace and pink rose-

 buds.  This was the grand prize for the orders we had taken.  I thought

 Mama would divide them up with the five of us, but she didn't.  She said

 they were hers, that she had paid for them a dozen times over, and I'd

 better not ever do a thing like that again.

      After things calmed down, we enjoyed our vanity cases that were like

 a status symbol to us as we carried them to school.  But I had been suffic-

 iently warned not to get involved in any more group business deals.  Sell-

 ing seeds or Cloverine Salve to earn a little bottle of perfume or some

 talcum powder was the extent of my next business ventures.

      On September 15, the first "aeroplane" flew over Hurricane.  The roar

 of the four-winged craft brought people running into the streets.  Ex-

 citedly I waved my hands and shouted,"Hello, hello."  Grandma Dolly Humph-

 ries, whose house was just south of Grandma Isom's, was standing by my side.

 "Hello, hello, hello," I called.  Then I thought I heard a voice from on
high.  "Grandma Humphries, I heard him.  He said hello!"

      "Ello,eh?" she chuckled.

      The plane landed on the Bench Lake Flat.  A short time later Hortense

 Beatty, on horseback, galloped up to our gate.  Breathlessly she said,"I
touched it I  I touched it.  I raced on my horse to the Lake Flat, slid off
and touched that aeroplane."

 Our eyes were wide with admiration for Hortense.

     Nora Barber was our fourth grade teacher, but etched in my memory is
her sister Christie who played the piano for us to march in by, and who
read "The Little Colonel" books to us.  From her I acquired a deep love
for the south and negro mammies and little pickaninnies,  i loved Christie's
dialect as she read.  I loved the shine on the lenses of her glasses and
the stray locks of hair that curled around her face.  Books became dear to
me, for through them I visited far away places and people. "The Little
Dutch Twins" books created a fascination for Holland within me, and I
longed for a pair of wooden shoes.

     Halloween was a time for painting funny masks on pieces of old bed
sheets with crayons, but we wore them only to Aunt Mary Stout*s and Aunt
Mary Campbell's.  We didn't go out on the streets..  Trick-or-treat had
not yet been heard of.  Halloween was all "trick", and boys played all of
the tricks.  Papa still sat back and laughed about the tricks he used to
pull when he was a boy.  Again we heard, between the raucous grating of
tick-tacks on our door, about the time the boys at Virgin dismantled the
bishop's wagon and reassembled it straddle of the ridge of the church house
roof.  And about the time they strung a wire from the church bell, through
the apple orchard to Brother Beebee's mule's leg, which kept the bell rinq-
ing all night.

     The most interesting part of Halloween was the morning after.  I could
hardly wait to see who's front gate was hanging on the cross bar of a power
pole, or how many outhouses were assembled on the school playground, or how

                                   -44-
many wagons were piled in a heap on the streets. 'Outhouses were the choice
targets of goblins.  The one I loved most was the one parked on a wagon in
the dead-end lane by Uncle Lew Campbell's place.

     Usually people needed their property and retrieved it the next day,
but this little house was unclaimed for days, so lantha and I moved in.
With lye soap, scrubbing brushes and buckets of water we scrubbed every

 inch of the interior until the lumber took on the yellow of fresh sawed

 pine.  From old magazines and catalogs and a bucket of flour paste, we

 papered the walls, putting the prettiest pictures in the best places.
Aunt  Mary   let us have some discarded lace curtains that we hung on the
wall.  Putting a board over the seat, we padded it with an old camp quilt.
Two velvet cushions, borrowed without the asking, gave it the homey touch.

 On the floor was a hooked rug that had been put away for repairs.  This
little privy became a castle in our eyes.  We could hardly wait until
school was out each day to go and play.  Then we came home one day to find
the wagon, the house;and all of our finery gone.  We couldn't grieve, be-

 cause we knew eventually it would happen.  We could only imagine how de-

 lighted the owner must be to see the transformation.

     With the beginning of school a major change came in our family.  Grand-
ma Isom moved to St. George to spend the winter doing temple work, and our
sister Annie went with her to attend Dixie High.  Mildred promptly graduated
from sharing my room and moved in with Kate, and Edith moved into my bed-
room.  The general shifting was like "fruit-basket tipped over."  Life took
on new dimensions.  Mildred had always pampered me  by seeing that I was
safely in bed before she turned out the light.  Things were mighty different
now.

     Edith was scared of the dark.  I had to go to the room first and turn
on the light, then Edith came cautiously and looked under the bed.  "Nope.
Nobody there," she'd say, then leap into bed, burrowing under the covers,
and I turned out the light.

     This nightly ritual gave me the prickly feeling that eventually we'd
find a monster under the bed.  In fact, he could suddenly appear after I
had turned out the light.  He could reach out from under the bed and grab
my feet before I pulled them up under the quilts.

     Once I decided to beat Edith at this game, so she'd have to turn out
the light.  I snuggled down in bed, and with a look of fright, she turned
out the light and leaped through the air, landing in the middle of the bed
with such a jolt that the board slats under the springs clattered to the
floor.  I had to get up and wave my arms through the dark searching for the
drop cord to turn the light on so we could rebuild our bed.

     As Christmas drew near. Mama began making a red calico dress, just my
size.  As she fitted it to me she said, "this dress is for Venona Stout.
It's her Christmas present from Aunt Mary, so we must not let her know
about it."

     1 loved the dress, and felt excited as I modeled it.  I knew it was
for me, and that this was Mama's way of surprising me.  And then on Christ-
mas morning, Venona burst into the house to show off her new red dress.  I
survived the shock, because Mama had been honest.

     Dr. Davis rented Grandma Isom's house while she was in St. George.  He

 gave us each a big orange for Christmas.  Oh,my!

                                   -45-

                                CHAPTER 9

                         Patriarchal Blessing

                                 (1921)

     Usually I loved thunder because it reminded me of Kolob.  Lightning,
at a safe distance, was appealing to me too, but when the very air snapped
and my hair prickled, I felt a mite jittery.  This particular March night
an electric storm was beginning to get unruly.  I had gone to my room for
something and as I reached to turn out the light, balls of liquid fire
spilled from the ceiling down the drop cord and down my arm.  Dazed, I
crumpled to the floor.  I had the sensation of being sucked into a deep,
dark cave.  From somewhere far, far away, I could hear someone screaming
and screaming.

     After what seemed ages, dim lights cast weird shadows in my bottom-
less cavern.  Mama appeared,carrying a lantern.  Kneeling,she held me in
her arms.  But that screaming, that detached, far away screaming, would
not cease.

     Mama brushed my hair back and rubbed my face, saying gently "There,
there, you are all right."

     Suddenly I realized the screaming was coming from me!  How could that
be?  How could I be screaming and not know it?  I tried to stop.  Mama
held me close and at last my screams turned to sobs, violent, shaking sobs.
Try as I would I could not control them for a long time.

     At the precice moment that I had reached for the light, lightning
struck the transformer on the power pole at the comer of our lot.  My
sisters said balls of fire raced along the wires down our street.  As the
house went dark and my screams piercing he air. Papa remarked, "Well,
there's one thing we know for sure, Alice is still alive."

     The incident left me afraid.  I was afraid of night,refusing to even
go into the kitchen alone.  And then the thing I feared most of all happ-
ened.  Another electric storm.  In the early evening too, the same as the
last onel

     Right during the thunder, Richard Bradshaw knocked on our door.
"Sister Isom, can Alice go sleep with Hortense tonight?" he asked.  "Hyrum
is away and she's afraid."

     Hortense was our cousin and I often slept with her when her husband
was away.  But this night I held my breath, waiting for Mama's reply. She
knew what a coward I had turned out to be.  I expected her to say Mildred
would go instead, but she didn't.  She told Richard I'd be glad to come
and he left.

     "Oh Mama, I darsen't go in the storm," I wailed.

     She put her arm around me and said,"there's nothing to be afraid of.
The Heavenly Father doesn't want anything to hurt you.  He will protect
you. "

     My fear left me.  As I walked to Hortense's place the lightning and
thunder reminded me of Kolob once more,and I loved it.  Mama could speak
words of assurance that made the heart happy.

                                 -46-

      There was something about Sacrament Meeting that bothered me.  Number

 one:  Meetings were too long.   Figeting on a bench for two hours wasn't

 fun.  Number two:  The speakers were always so gloomy.  Why couldn't they

 ever come up with a happy talk just for kids?  The doleful things they

 often said really made me squirm.  Number three: The only screens on the

 windows were the coarse kind to protect the glass from basket balls.  Flies

 flitted cheerfully through them, seeming to love to come to church.  And

 the building was hot, extra hot, because we had to sit still.

      Mama and Papa never made us go to church.  They simply took us.  I

 decided that when I was my own boss I'd quit.

      One Sunday afternoon a group of youngsters decided to escape to the

 river.  When they invited me to go along, I swallowed my guilty feelings

 and went.  I felt shabby in my everyday clothes and there was no happiness

 in the hike.  My feet had the worrisome feeling of wanting to turn back and

 my conscience nagged at me.  And the river!  Big deal!  It wasn't as in-

 viting as I had thought.  It was only a trickle.

      The Sunday sun had an abnormal glare, making my eyes feel squinty.

 Gnats buzzed in my ears and a pesky little fly zigged-zagged in front of

 my face, refusing to be brushed away.  Everyone had fun wading in the water

 but me.  I sat in the sand with my back to a boulder and suffered.  I'd

 lots rather be sweltering and shooing flies in church.  I longed to be

 with the rest of the family.

      I expected a scolding when I got home.  All Papa said was, 'Well, did

 you enjoy the afternoon ?"

      Shaking my head I said,"No.  It was awful.  I'd lots rather ao to

 church." •

      I had made an important discovery.  Sitting in church was actually
quite nice.  All of the folks I enjoyed most were there.  And when I really
listened, the speakers were right interesting.

     Benjamin Franklin LeBaron lived just below the black knoll coining
into Hurricane.  In the fall persimmons hung like oranges along his terrac-
ed hillside.  Flowers and fruits made his place a garden of Eden.  He was
a sweet, gentle and loving man who attracted children.

     Hurricane was mostly orchards.  In fact, it was the fruit in our
valley that brought the LeBarons.  Brother LeBaron was responsible for the
Evaporator that was built by his home.  It should have been one of the biq-
gest business ventures in our area, for there were tons and tons of peaches
that fell to the ground every year for want of a market.  Farmers had been
using lumber scaffolds on saw horses to dry fruit on, making every effort
to save their crops,but it wasn't enough.  The Evaparator dried the fruit
and extracted juice by power.  But for some reason, the business was of
short duration, lasting only a season or two.  The brick building still
stands and is an apartment house today.

     We belonged to the St. George Stake, and Brother LeBaron became the
first Stake Patriarch in Hurricane.  One day, as I was passing LeBaron's,
on a sudden impulse I knocked on their door.

     "Brother LeBaron, will you give me a patriarchal blessing?" I asked.

 • Story "I Know He Lives" published in the June 1976 Friend

                                  -47-

      "Of course," he answered,"come in."

      He put his hands on my head and Sister LeBaron acted as scribe.  I'll

 adroit that I tried to dictate to the Lord as Brother LeBaron  spoke.  In

 Sacrament Meeting, a young woman who had just returned from the mission

 field, reported her mission.  She had a radiance about her that I admired

 with all my heart.  As I listened to her, I knew that someday I too mast

 go on a mission.  So I listened hard for our Patriarch to say I would, but

 he didn't.

      He said that my basket would always be filled with plenty.  Since we

 had been warned so many times by Grandma that if we wasted even a crust of

 bread, the day would come when we wished we had that crust, to have my

 basket always filled was a comforting thought.  When Brother LeBaron

 promised me that the Tempter' should never have power over me, I felt very

 strong.  That promise has sustained me time and again throughout my life.

 Other things he said have been a guiding light to me as I grew up.  Many

 times when I've been filled with anxiety, I have re-read that blessing

 and have been strengthened and comforted.

     Annie, Kate and Mildred did housework for women who had new babies,
took in washings and picked fruit.  They bought all of their own clothes,
never expecting a penny from Papa or Mama. i wanted to be independent too.

 I was agile at climbing trees, so I should have a real talent for pickincr

 fruit.    But being able to swing from the skinniest or highest limb doesn't

 fill a bucket with fruit.  To my dismay, I found out I was actually one of
the slowest pickers.  I honestly tried.  I took every job I could get pick-
ing strawberries, cherries or apricots, and each day in the orchard I re-
solved to beat all of the other kids.  But I never did.  It gave me an in-

 feriority complex, so much so in fact that I even developed a grudge against
mourning doves.  Those birds were always in the fields with the crack of
dawn, mourning.  Such a bleak, tired sound, when a fellow should still be
home in bed!

     But by my eleventh birthday I had still saved enough to send off to
Chicago Mail Order for my winter's supply of long cotton stockings and a
pair of shoes.  Shoes!  New shoes!  How I loved them.  The shine of new
shoes on my own two feet to me was the number one richest blessing!

     The fifth grade was an important milestone in my life.  We had a man
teacher, Kenneth Cannon.  Romantic!  Any love affair I had had before this
was child stuff.  Mr. Cannon had a happy sense of humor and school was fun.
Except when Freal Sfcratton, who sat behind me, dipped the ends of my braids
in the inkwell.  Or worse still, when he removed his inkwell and tied my
braids to the desk through the hole.  He worked so carefully that I didn't
know I was tied down until I went to get up.  The yank of my braids almost
broke my neck.  Sometimes he tied my sashes to the bench and my dress tore
when I got up.  How embarrassing it must have been to the Lord for having

 created him.

     At Christmas time, I received what was to be my last doll.  Although
I never played with dolls anymore, my love for them was unchanged.  This
doll was a beauty, with a''boughten"head, real hair, and a rag body.  Mama
had dressed her in pink dotted-swiss, and she looked beautiful on my dresser
in my room.

                                  -48-

                              CHAPTER 10

                     In Which Papa Has Another Son

                                  (1922)

     In the spring of 1922, Kate graduated from the first. Second Year
High School Class held in Hurricane.  After school was out, she went to
Cedar to work for Gwen Matheson.  Annie had a summer job working in Zion
Canyon at "The Wiley Way."

     And Mildred came down with one of the most severe cases of construct-
ion fever that ever hit a fourteen-year-old girl.  She took it out on the
steps outside the kitchen door.  Why those steps were as much a part of the
house as the roof was, and I would never have dreamed of changing them.
But Mildred had visions of a cement porch.  From somewhere, she came up
with a faded pair of bib overalls that had room enough in them for two of
her.  (Papa only wore waist overalls held up with galluses.)

     Mildred ripped away the wooden steps and hauled wheelbarrow load
after load of rocks, filling up a form she had built of boards.  Her en-
durance was uncanny.  Just one load of rocks  like she hauled, was enough
to do me under.  But it was her project, and she persisted.  Papa provided
the cement and she hand-mixed it and dumped it over the rocks.  Then I
think she wore out, because the porch was never trowel ed, but had a rustic,
rugged, non-skid finish.  It was possible to trip, but never to slip on
Mildred's dream porch.  And it endured for years, a lasting monument to
our sister.

     It was interesting how attractive Mildred was to the boy who lived .
through the block, while she slaved away, blistering her hands on rocks
and cement.  He reclined under the cherry tree next to the house, trying
to flirt with her.  Boy friends were something new in our family.  We
figured ourselves to be the shy, spinster type.  Papa cautioned Mildred
not to take up with any boy that would loll in the shade making sweet talk,
while she pushed the wheelbarrow.  "He is nothing but a trashy, lazy lot,"
he warned.

     Mildred went to work for Grandma Petty on week days and for Hannah
Hall on Saturdays.  Every other week, I had to help Mildred carry Potty's
washing home.  It was packed tight in a No. 1 tub, along with the home-
made lye soap.  The tub was heavy and we had to set it down often in the
two and one-half blocks, to change hands.

     Washing took all day.  The fire under the black tub had to be built
far enough away from the house to avoid the smoke.  We had no hose, but
carried every bucket of water from the tap by the porch, down the path to
the tub.  When the water was hot, we poured in a teaspoon of lye and a gray
scum of hard-water  rose thick to the top.  After skimming this off, we
carried the hot water up the path, up the steps and into the kitchen to
fill the "Easy" washer.  Every drop of wash water and rinse water had to
be carried in and carried out, bucket full at a time.  And the clothes-
line was beyond the garden by the lucem patch, quite a distance for
carrying heavy, half-wrung out baskets of clothes.  Sometimes it took the
following day for things to dry.  By the time they were gathered, folded
and hand-carried back in the cumbersome tub, we had earned fifty-cents

 each.    Before the "Easy" washer came into our home, everything had to be
-49-

scrubbed on the board.  I have no nostalgic longings for the "good old
wash days."

     And no nostalgic longing for bare, pine board floors.  With my sisters
away, the Saturday scrubbing fell more often to me.  Lye soap and one hour
of scrubbing and rinsing made every board look new, but left my water-
wrinkled fingers raw with lye holes, my knees red and swollen,and an ache

 in my back.  The woven rag carpet had long since been discarded, hooked

 and braided scatter.rugs>taking its place.  Linoleum covered the other

 floors in the house.

      By this time I was fairly well trained for scrubbing floors on my

 hands and knees.  Homer and Joe (Josephine) Englestead rented our two

 north rooms.  We loved to tend their little girl Alice, and Joe often

 flattered me: into scrubbing her floors.

     While I scrubbed, Joe would say,"Alice, you are a champion floor
scrubber.  If I were you, I'd ask my mother to let me scrub floors all of
my life.  No one can do it better than you."  And then before I'd groan
at the thought, she'd say, "Open your mouth."

     Sitting back on my heels, I'd open my mouth and she'd pop a chocolate
into it.  Umnnnml  How good, how good.  On and on I'd scrub.  When I was
finished, she'd pay me a dime.  It wasn't the flattery, nor the dime that
kept me scrubbing, but the chocolates.

     Joe was a story teller.  Her quick sense of humor and keen imagin-
ation made her a natural.  She used to tell us tales about people and
places she knew.

     "I used to get 'A' in English Class for my compositions," she'd say.
"Mine were the best.  You have to tell some whoppers to be the best."

     She used to tell of a kid named Ed who was tampering with tobacco.
His mother suspected it, so she asked him to kiss her goodnight, but he
refused.  Instead, he clomped outside, climbed the ladder to the attic
and crawled into bed without even saying his prayers.  His conscience
nagged him and he could see his mother's troubled face.

     He tumbled and tossed and pretty soon a swarm of little red devils
scampered up the ladder into the attic and danced upon his bed.  Then he
heard a rumbling and bellowing and the old bull lumbered from the pasture
and came puffing up the ladder.

     Sticking his monstrous  fat head in the attic window, he rumbled,
"Ed, Ed, get up and say your prayers."

     Ed was scared almost to death and he got up and prayed.  The little
devils left, the bull went back down the ladder and Ed kept himself fit
to kiss his mother every night after that.

     Edith's and LaPriel's Saturday job was to scrub the wooden chairs and
sweep the yard.  Sometimes they kept sweeping until little paths went right
up to Mama's flower beds, and a broad, impressive path was swept all the
way to the barn.  We didn't have a lawn, but hard-packed dirt yards, bordered
with flowers, pomegranates and grapes.

     When the Saturday's cleaning was done, we were free to climb the hill
to gather wild flowers.  We must have denuded the Hurricane Hill, because
-50-


 we picked every larkspur, buttercup or sego Illy we could find.

 »1^ QnesaturdaY< I hiked to the river with Retta Humphries, she brought

 along a frying pan and a couple of trout and we fried them by the river

 bank.  Eating out of that frying pan was a most satisfying adventure

 ^ ^Sh!^ Rettals fTOlly WM UESet over the^terioTSs.ppear-

 ^^^I ^had "^len^Mr^und^h-^en'hT
h^F^y^L-i^^^^^^^

         s'om.one^d^S'b^ed^oTer'cot" ^S - ""
of her "snell<s "  "woa*.4- ^  -n n .r, ——0 "er c:ot::^ lt sent her into one
of theSy^" ^^^^W^ Sl6!^
had^b.-ayed-n the^dar^Shis^s nS^f^si^es11^^ s0^311'
^ain"11 A^- The pl•yers were dlvlded lnt0 ts0 ^'each ^hT'

                                                    i?'

                                  -51-

      "All right you fellows, bring those pipes to ray desk," Mr. Gates

 demanded.

      Instantly they leaped upon him, pinning him down.  Terrified,we

 watched the tangle of feet and fists.  One of the students darted from

 the room and returned with the principal, who grabbed the  ruffians

 by their collars.  They were expelled from school, never to return.

      Karl Larsen was our music teacher.  When he taught us to read notes,

 I became excited about learning to play the organ.  Enthusiastically, I

 studied the organ book that was stored in the music compartment of our

 treadle organ.  After I had mastered "The Mosquito Waltz", I informed one

 of my classmates that I was going to be a musician.

      "Let me look at your hands," he said.  Taking my hand in his, he spread

 out my fingers.  "You'll never learn to play," he said flatly.

      "Why won't I?" I asked.

      "Because your hands aren't shaped right.  Your fingers aren't long

 enough."

     What a let down.  Foolishly, I believed him  and quit trying, except
to fiddle out a few tunes by ear, like "Springtime in the Rockies."

      In October, when the sweet smell of steaming cane juice wafted across
town, we knew Will Wilson's molasses mill was running.  After our Saturday's
work was through, Mama often let us take our lard bucket to the mill, and
Will always filled it with skimmings.  The pulp and trash from the cane was
in the skimmings, but there was enough syrup underneath the foam to make a
batch of candy.  If we didn't have almonds, we used peach pits for nuts,
which made the candy a little bitter.  Eating too much of it made our
stomachs ache.  Golda Campbell was sick a long time from eating peach pit
candy.  More than the satisfaction of eating the candy, was the fun of
cracking the hard shelled pits and of trekking to the mill,  and seeing
things on the way, especially the tiny toads no bigger than honey bees.

     On winter afternoons when school was through, we played baseball in
the street.  Even when I hit the ball, I could never beat it to first base.
In choosing up teams, they always chose me last.  I could have developed a
complex, except for the fact that in school when they chose up sides for a
spelling match, I was always chosen first.

     I don't know whether Papa answered an advertisment, or how the Excelcis
representative happened to call at our house, but call he did.  And while he
subtly hypnotized Papa, my Lee's Manufacturing exploits leaped to Papa's
mind  and my potential qualities loomed before him, and I was signed up to
take the agency.  What Papa didn't realize was  that my salesman days were
over.  It had been nothing more than a passing childhood fancy.  By now I
dearly hated selling.  No matter!  In one brief hour, I got all twelve
lessons on how to mesmerize the housewife, or how to hoodwink her into
thinking she couldn't live without what I had to sell.

     What a gloomy, sad dayl  The bold confidence I had felt when I earned
roy little vanity case,  or my ruby birthstone ring,  had long since turned to
self-consciousness, and I was actually afraid.

     But sally forth I musti  Filling my hands with little yellow price
lists. Papa sent me out into the world to seek my fortune.  Timidly

                                   -52-

 I knocked on the first door, hoping no one would answer, but in those days

 everyone was at home.  When a lady suddenly appeared before me, all of the

 door approaches the representative had taught me  fled from my mind.

 Timidly, I half whispered,"You don't want to buy any extracts of spices

 do you?"

      "No I don't.  We have plenty," she answered.

      "I have face powder, coconut pie filling and lemon pie filling," I

 added.

      "Pie filling?" Her eyebrow raised.

      "And cake mixes," I added hurridly.

      "Tell me about your pie fillings and cake mixes," she asked.

      Ready mixes had not yet appeared in grocery stores.  I was in business.

 Curious customers were eager to try my mixes and so was I.  I squandered

 my first month's commission on them.  The cake was the crustiest, best

 morsel I had ever eaten.  (Every cake was the best I had ever eaten, the

 one at the moment that is, because cakes were rare.)

      I was a little dubious about pushing cosmetics.  Hearing Papa and

 Grandma talk of the Harlots of the Virgin Oil Boom Days, had given me the

 idea that only bad women used make-up and perfume.  Still I was aware that

 when Grandma was decked in her satin and lace and the kid curlers unwound

 from her hair, she smelled of carnations and her skin had the look of

 velvet.  But I was apologetic about selling a sinful thing like face powder

 and when I told Annie Wright (who was the age of Mama) that the Daughters

 of Zion shouldn't use such things, she bought some.

      Right then I shed my Quaker standards.  That's when I started dabbling

 with my perfume samples, which came in thin glass tubes.  One of them broke

 in my pocket at school during music period one day.

      "Phewt" Mr. Larsen exclaimed, "What's that stifling smell?"

      "It's Alice," one of the boys piped up.

      "Open the windows before we smother.  Alice, you may leave the room."

     Wafting the aroma of lilacs, I drifted out, knowing I had blessed the
room with a breath of spring.  It was almost time for school to let out for
the day anyway.
^   Kipa was a Re1Pablican-  In all of the history of Washington County,
there had been only one Republican sent to the State Legislature, and that
was J. W. Imlay of Hurricane , two years before.     At election time we
^t810^ ahout P011^ in °^ "ome. This year an interesting race for
the State Legislature was putting Hurricane on the map, because both the
Democrat and Republican candidates were from our town.  David Hirschi
Republican, was running against Charlie Petty, Democrat.

 -,              Evenas     good    a    ^P"1311^    as     Papa    was,     he    surprised    us         just    before
election day  by coming in with a wide grin and a flat can of McGown's
salmon —  a salmon steak, it was, like you never find in a can anymore.

     "Where did you get that?" Mama asked.

"Charlie Petty gave it to me," Papa replied.

                                -53-

  to ^^les^ right backT" she demanded-  'lcharlie petty ±snlt ^

      I looked at the can of salmon, my digestive juices flowing with a

  sudden sensation of total starvation.  The room became very tense.  Papa

  som^;01"6^ ofplea' but Mama was firm- ^ seemed s0 me^ and Mama

  so mghty, their roles were  completely reversed.  Papa was on trial and

  I so much wanted him to win.  This is the only recollection I have of

  Mama ever opposing Papa.

      Then I guess Mama got to thinking how humiliating it would be for

 ao^J0 ^e ^° TS"" the salmont and how ^"^ing it would make her

 appe^^ ^  T   pat s0 she let hin1 convin^ her that Charlie only

 £2 b^^ salnlon ^ a friendly gesture. So we opened the can and put

 Section           on a p    for supper) and David Hirschi- won the

 Willi^3^ ^ dlfference there ^ between our little brothers.

 S^n^T  t°P star in Papa's heaven, because he arrived before

 Clinton and Wayne  At five, he still had a bit of angel shining through

 and one-hSf1"1    ^ T lmew how t0 influen^ Pe°Ple.  Clinton, at two

 and one-half, was already off on exploring expeditions.  His interest was

 not so much in people as it was in places and things.  He learner cSmb

 the highest piece of furniture before he could even walk.  Hehad an £

 satiable curiosity that led him into everything.  Fondly we caUed him

 ^l2f'wasohisbenamse 'S had freckles- but blcause of th: ^ that said,

 wSdow pane33 ^.      He always used t0 ^ the blame'. f^ every broken'

 about-h: mJphSgTiisZ^t^a^^ ^^^^^S

 ^             t^Tand^ ^^^^^£

 preserves which he brakes the bottle of preserves on ^e floor.c1     g  p

 white^ses! sti11 in the age of innocence» a litt^ doll i" his dainty,

 forlorn^d^oneL^G^^ was normally a day of happy ^ectancy, dawned

 ^e-H^^^^       tTs^oT

 at the B. A. C. in Cedar, and Kate was working in Cedar too   Even Milrir^
cake."'"5"13'" I said going t0 her bedside-   "I wish I knew how to make a

     "We haven't rendered out the lard yet," she said.

     Vegetable shortening so far as I know, was non-existent
you c^S;;^?-^ ", ^^^S's^ ^""nT———
how to make a cake."                          Y "I:out' and •s- will tell you

    The room suddenly brightened.  My feet fairly flew to Aunt Mary's and

                                  -54-
and back.  In and out of Mania's room I went for step-by-step instructions,
and carefully I watched until the cake came out of the oven, a golden-brown
beauty.  Good things from the cellar made the dinner complete and Mama was
able to come to the table.  My heart swelled with true thanksgiving for I
had discovered the joy of doing things.  Everyone enjoyed my cake.  It was
very good and I knew it, and I had made it myself. »


                                CHAPTER 11

                             Annie Comes Home

                                 (1923)

      In a letter to Annie and Kate, dated January 11, 1923, Mama says,

 "Dear Girls, I certainly have a comp for you both.  William came in with
an egg and said 'The hen laid this that has a face like Kate.  There's
one hen with a face like Annie's and one with a face like lanthus Spend-
love and there's five black hens that have faces like Kate's.'   I re-
member the time when things looked that way to me.  Even houses had

 faces with frowns or smiles and usually resembled some member of the

 family that lived in them.

     Wayne has his second tooth and can say 'coon' through his nose just
like Annie used to sing 'coon, coon' and he can say 'pop, pop, mom, mom,
pop. '

     Feb. 14 -  Mildred has gone to a Valentine dance tonight and the
others are flying about town and we are sitting here without a fire and
it is bed time and as I can think of nothing to write, I think we will
hie to bed.

     Maybe I had better tell you about Freckles.  When Grandma was out,
he went in and struck a lot of matches and mixed up some dope, then came
home and drank all her pepper sauce, then cried till bed time, thought he
was hungry because his stomach burned.  Today he made another visit there.
She discovered it and brought him home.  He broke a bowl, poured all my
yeast out and I didn't know it till I was ready to make the bread.  I
put some kindlings behind the stove for morning and he started to build a
fire there.  LaPriel bought a valentine.  He burned that up.  Well, that's
nearly a daily program or its equivalent.  Love, from Mama."

     Clinton's mania for matches kept Mama constantly on guard.  He had a
fascination for electric outlets too.  Instead of plug-in sockets, we had
screw-in sockets, which were little wells in the wall.  The well was pro-
tected with a round copper door hinged onto a wall plate.  We all wore
high-topped button shoes, so the button hook hung handy-by on the door
casing between the living room and kitchen, near our one electric outlet.

     On his exploratory rounds, Clinton pushed his chair into the doorway,
and climbed after the button hook.  The pretty copper wall plate caught his
eye.  With nimble fingers he opened the little door and caught sight of
the shiny copper spot in the center of the well.  To touch this with the
button hook was the logical thing to do, so he took a jab at it.  A sputter-
ing circle of light whipped like a lasso around the room, and with a yelp,
Clinton landed on his back on the floor.

 - Story "A Not So Pitiful Thanksgiving," in the November 1979 Friend
-55-

Following are parts taken from a letter written by me to Kate and

Annie, dated March, 1923.

G^ny ^9 .,
,    ^  ^-F  ^/de
bov\/5  G ' ,
b / u. e   S ^t ^1
7- ? b b 0 D  ———>

•me


   I   We^   1ln<S "Fr-<-'7^

   C-f  TO-y  h ^, /'7-   rL^c^

   5 i/G k   /'t  Wit n  -S'r'c^^

  CL nd  5' ^ ^. P e  .' T:  p >-;
i  -m\i, -fc-re^ecL^  ,'(ke
V. t. h / $• -


     "Dear Sisters .... Clinton says to tell you our turkey layed a
egg.  Did you feel a breeze up there day before yesterday?  Well, it
struck us.  The ground just flew around in the air.  The peddles on the
apricot flowers layed on the place where the ground ought to be.  Some
ground got in a pan where the milk ought to be.  The milk got on the floor
where the ground ought not to be.  My hair flew up in the air where the
sunshine ought to be, the sunshine was up in the clouds where the rain
ought to be.  Some storm.

     Kate I heard a comp for you.  I heard that you was the most unself-
ish and best girl ever.  Good for you.

     Annie I am glad you are looking and feeling so well.  I hope you soon
ketch up with your work.

     Mildred gets the sore throat every Saturday so she can get out of the
work. ... When you kids get home I will squeeze you to pieces.  Beware!!!
.... Kate I am the only girl that wears ribbons in my hair.  I don't
care.  Oh yes, lone Tiffony wears her hair that way too. . . . I am as ever
your loving sister, Alice.  OX OX OX OX Two hugs and kisses apiece."

     One morning in history class, Karl Larsen said, "Alice, will you ask
your Grandma if she'll come and visit our class?"


     "Oh yes," I exclaimed.
with her stories.

I knew Grandma could hold the class spellbound


     When I asked her. Grandma said,"I•11 be happy to come."

     "Mr. Larsen said he'd come for you in his car.  Our class is at 10
o'clock," I told her.

     Next morning I said, "Mr. Larsen, Grandma will be ready when you call
for her."

     "Good," he replied, proceeding with the class.

     I was so anxious for him to go after her that the class seemed eternal.
Finally, slipping up to his desk, I whispered, "Aren't you going after
Grandma?"

                                     -56-

      "Why»I haven't asked her to come yet," he answered in surprise.  "I

 only wanted to know if she would."

      I felt horrible.  Dashing home at noon I found Grandma waiting and

 watching out the window for Mr. Larsen's car.  She had even curled her hair

 with irons heated in the lamp chimney.  Primly she sat in her black satin

 dress, the one I loved most of all with the ecru lace dickey and the embroi-

 dered red rose.

      "Oh Grandma," I cried,"I'm so sorry.  Mr. Larsen didn't tell me which

 day he wanted you to come."

      A hurt look flashed across her face, but quickly she smiled and put

 her arm around me.  "It's all right.  I'll come when he wants me."

      Mr. Larsen never did say when he wanted her, and I struggled with my

 tottering faith in grownups.

      Our bishop died February 2, 1923.  He was the only bishop I had ever

 known.  It pleased me when he gave me a pat on the back^-   Paying tithinq

 had been fun ever since the day I took him my rooster.  Bishop Isom's home

 was beautiful, with a stairway sweeping grandly down into the living room.

 Before he built his home, he lived in a tent.  In those days he kept the

 tithing and fast offering money in a can in his wheat bin, and when the

 Church Auditor came to see him, he put a horse blanket around the Auditor

 to keep him warm.

      People paid tithing in cash if they could.  If they couldn't, they

 paid in produce, and the Bishop gave them a receipt.  The produce given to

 the "worthy poor" didn't have to be turned into the Church as cash, but

 the surplus did.  If the Bishop couldn't sell it, he bought it himself.

 Since he already raised everything he needed, he usually ended up giving

 the surplus to those who didn't qualify as "the poor."  He had always been

 kind and good to everyone, and the people loved him.

      Ira Bradshaw was put in as our new Bishop on May 20, 1923.

      I was absent the day our class planned a party for the closing of
school, so my invitation came by mail in a pretty pink envelope.  It read

 "Lady Alice, robed in velvet, scarcely deigned to fling a glance, on the '
coarse home woven cotton, flitting through the rustic dance.  Lady Alice
will you please me, by coming to the school house bright, very early in '
the evening at 7:30 Saturday night?"  It was signed "Theron Lathum."  He
had happened to draw my name.

     At the party we danced awkwardly together, and then the class played
games.  Because our house was on the way to his, Theron walked me home after
the party, but neither of us said anything.  Theron's cheeks were fat and
pink.  I liked bashful, round-faced boys, and thought of him as my boy friend
after that.     I saw him cast shy glances in my direction too, but we never
did get around to speaking to each other.

     Just before school closed, our entire class sneaked off to Gould's Wash,
^v^ ' lnclud;Lng me- I hadnlt ^gotten my unpopularity on April Fool's

 ^yr  ^en everyone ^appeared but me. Even the teacher looked
annoyed when she saw me sitting there alone.  The memory of it gave me the

                                    -57-

 courage to sluff with the rest of the class.

      After school was out, a letter from Annie informed us of the day she

 would be home.  Excitedly we watched every car as it came around the bend

 by Pete Lathum's.

      "Annie will be in this car," we'd cry.  As the car sped on, we'd say,

 "Nope.  She wasn't in that one.  She will be in the next one."

      And so the game continued during the anxious waiting hours.  As night

 came. Papa entered the game.  Each set of beaming headlights was the one.

 At last!  A car stopped at our gate and Annie got out with her suitcases!

      How pretty she was.  Her cheeks were round and rosy, an infallible

 mark of beauty, her eyes sparkled, and her clothes looked like college.

 With my flair for romance, I was excited to learn that Annie had a boy-

 friend?too.  His name was Rass Matheson.  She met him while Kate worked

 for Rass's sister-in-law Gwen.  Instinctively I knew she would marry him,

 and all of the Mathesons would be our relatives.

      Annie was an efficient stenographer, speedy in shorthand and typing,

 so Charlie Petty hired her.  So now, after having been gone for so long,

 she was finally living home again.

      Summer is happy things sandwiched in between work.  After school let

 out, Mildred went to work for Orson Hall in St. George, but she got home-

 sick and I was glad.  Together we made a cozy nook with our pillows and an

 old camp quilt among the willows along the canal bank and settled down to

 read love stories.  My favorite was B. M. Bauer's "Chip of the Flying U."

 My emotions soared like a bird on the wings of romance.  The background

 music of water racing through the headgate and splashing down the hill, the

 rustling of the willowsaand twittering of the birds helped.  Next we read

  "The Sheik."  It was a little more sophisticated, but still we were trans-

 ported.

      The Sheik, on his white horse, dashed across the desert and kidnapped

 a French girl from the caravan, holding her close to his beating heart under

 his flying, sweet smelling white robes.  They galloped over the moonlit

 sand to his private tent, apart from his harem.  She never knew when he

 silently slipped away in the night.

      Unluckily, Grandma got hold of the book.  "Annie," she exclaimed to

 Mama, "do you know what sort of trash these girls are reading?"

      "Grandma, if isn't trash," I said defensively.  "It's a good love story."

      "It's trash," she insisted.

      The book vanished and we never saw it again.

      Reading with Mildred on the canal bank was a short-lived joy, for she
went to work in the laundry at the Wiley Way in Zion.

     Just as sleeping with Edith had had its humor, like her peeking under the

 bed to see who was there, so she livened up the dish doing.  Pointing to some

 specks on the shade at the kitchen window, she would say, "Each dot represents

 a hundred-thousand people."  Then she'd launch into a Grand Opera Pe3orSnce
minadcinga lady in town who had a penetrating, high vibrato.  An^ s^sne^an^
as she washed, while I wiped the dishes.                                         g

                                    -58-

      But Edith did not believe in unnecessary drudgery, especially at her

 expense.  One day, as we cleared the dinner table, Edith gave LaPriel a
swat on the head.

      "What was that for?" Papa demanded.

      "She didn't have to dirty her whole plate," Edith retorted.  "She

 could have put her molasses on just one spot."

      Papa did his best to carry on the normal activities of a man, like
riding the range.  Mama used to carry a chair out in the yard for him to
climb upon to mount his horse.  He stayed in the saddle all day long, and
when he came home at night, she helped him dismount.

     One day a bull gored his horse and Papa was thrown off, breaking a
couple of ribs.  Uncle Ren Spendlove's boys helped him home.  That was the
last time he ever rode for cattle, but as soon as his ribs mended, he re-
sumed walking to the barbershop every day with his checkerboard.

     Across the street from the barbershop, was the Isom Hotel, where the
traveling salesmen, or "drummers" put up.  They,too,joined in.the checker
games.  One drummer, Mr. Van Horn, came to our home in the evenings and
taught Papa the game of chess.  When Papa was involved in a game, he was
oblivious to everything else.

     One evening, Robert Woodbury came to visit him, but he was involved
in a chess game with Mr. Van Horn.  After visiting with Mama for a spell,
Brother Woodbury finally arose.  Papa and Van Horn were silently staring
at their chessmen.  It had been minutes since either one of them had spoken
or moved.

     Grinning, Brother Woodbury said, "Well, goodnight Annie.  Please tell
George I've been here to see him."

     With Annie clerking in Petty's store, luxuries began to appear on our
table, like bananas and pineapple.  Annie made wonderful new kinds of pies,
too.  And more than that, she set our table with beautiful, new dinner
plates.  They were larger than the ones I got from Lee's Manufacturing
Company, and nicer.     She bought a generous set, enough for our big table.
Lovingly I  washed them when it was my turn to do the dishes.

     Then it came LaPriel*s turn to clear the table.  She stacked the plates,
and carried them in one load to the kitchen.  Somehow they slipped, shatter-
ing in fragments on the floor.  What a disaster 1  I think all of us went
into shock.

     "LaPriel, look what you have done," Papa shouted.  "Now you will have
to get busy and pay for every one of them."

     LaPriel was our littlest sister, scarcely nine!  Conscientiously,
she saved every penny she earned, then finally Annie and Mama came to her
rescue and helped her.  Mama never scolded when we broke a dish.  She knew
how we felt, and that was punishment enough.

     Taking out tonsils was a neighborhood affair.  When LaPriel had hers
removed. Dr. Baker did the mass operations in Will Wilson's home.  Now it
was time for Willie and Clinton to get their tonsils out.  The leaves on our

                                    -59-

 dining table were opened up for the slaughter.  How many youngsters were

 operated on in our living room, I don't recall, but I do remember that the
house was heavy with  chloroform,and there were groggy, blood-spitting kids
rolled up in blankets  lying all about the room.

      Papa's enthusiasm about my sales ability with Excelcis was so great

 that he decided I should cover LaVerkin,too.  Because of his desire to help,
he walked the two miles down the dugway, across the river and up the other

 side with me to LaVerkin.  The sun was blistering hot.  By the time we had

 canvassed the town as far as Grace Stout's home, my world turned black.

 Sister Stout said I was having a sun stroke.  She had us come in and rest,

 and she brought us a drink.  As we left, she put one of her daughter's

 pretty straw hats on my head.  The hat had blue streamers down the back.
A man came along in a wagon and Papa asked if we could ride with him to

 Hurricane.  When the goods arrived from Excelcis, Papa arranged for a car

 to take us to LaVerkin.  I earned about $5.00 a month for taking orders.

      One day I sat yearning over a picture of satin pumps in the Chicago
Mail Order Catalog.  Holding my feet in front of me, I fancied I could see

 the soft sheen of black satin and the qlitter of rhinestone buckles upon
them.  With a sigh I looked up as Mama came into the room.

      "Look how pretty. Mama, and they only cost $2.00.  Can I order them?"

      "Don't be foolish," she cautioned.  "Satin becomes rags.  To put those
slippers on your feet would be like casting pearls before swine."

     What a thing for Mama to say!  I knew very well she didn't think of me
as a swine.  Mulling this over in my mind,! realized  that since all I ever
had was one pair of shoes at a time, satin pumps wouldn't be so good for

 climbing upon the hill.

     That fall I was in the seventh grade and Karl Larsen was my full-time
teacher.  I remember Karl mostly for his beautiful art work on the black-
board in colored chalk,    for his excellence in teaching music, and for
saving Lalif Wood's life.  Lalif was so happy about his new necktie that he
kept tying and untying it.  Once he slipped the knot so tight under his
collar that he couldn't loosen it.  His face got red, then redder and redder.
When his ears fumed purple, one of the boys shouted, "Mr. Larsen, look at
LalifI"  With a bound Mr. Larsen was down the aisle.  Quick as a flash he
pulled out his pocket knife and cut Lalif's tie free.

     I submitted a second drawing to the Juvenile Instructor.  This one was
of a boy with a rag wrapped around his stubbed toe.  When it was published,
I received a Hiawatha Reader "Being Longfellow's Song of Hiawatha" edited by
Robert George.  In the preface is written, "To teach a child to read, and
not teach him what to read, is to put a dangerous weapon into his hands."
Then it goes on to say that the Song of Hiawatha is recognized as one of the
most fascinating poems in our language.  The book is beautifully illustrated
and although loved and worn, is still on my book shelf today.

     The biggest event each fall was the coming of the Ellison White Chautaucua
troupe to Hurricane.  For five nights they played on stage in the school
house.  Posters announcing their coming  were up in Judd's and Petty's store
windows, and I was always waiting in the school yard as their vans/loaded
with stage props, arrived.  Every year I passed handbills to earn a season's
Li X CrC Gt •

                                   -60-

      Each night I sat spellbound, as the troupe of actors played their

 great and moving drama  and my tears flowed freely as I lived every line,

 until one night, during "The Great Divide," Fern Ruesch leaned forward,

 putting her face in front of mine.

      "Alice, you're crying," she giggled.

      Embarrassed, I wiped my cheeks.  In that moment I resolved to never

 be caught crying in public again.  Now I wish I could shed tears more

 freely.

      At Thanksgiving time, Mama wrote the following letter to Kate, who

 was working in Cedar.

                                                    Hurricane, Utah

                                                    26 November 1923

 Dear Daughter:

      We will send your underware so you can be warmer.  Wish you had them

 now as it is getting colder.  There was ice on the step this morning where

 the spray came from the tap, and I saw a very thin ice in the corral a few

 mornings ago, the only bit I have seen this fall.  The wind is blowing

 frightfully just like it did twelve years ago tonight when our only little

 boy left us.  The whole of this month has reminded me so much of that one,

 but I must not think of such things when there are so many things to be

 thankful for.

      I will tell you of some of our friends (friends in need, friends in-

 deed) good acts.  Perhaps you remember of Charles Alien hauling our hay

 last summer and there was so little of it that he would not take pay, then

 Brother Reber cut the grain and when Papa told him to bring his sacks at

 threshing time for his pay he did not do it, just laughed and said he could

 do that much for nothing.  James Stanworth put in the fall grain out in the

 field and when we asked his bill he said "Nothing."

      Charles Alien hauled two cords of wood for us and had the town credit
one to himself and the other to Uncle Ren, on woodhaulers day for the dis-
abled and widows and Papa got him to put up our last cutting of hay on
shares here and when we got after him, he said that was all right, just to
let him know any time he could help.  And Howard Isom sawed our wood and
said their regular price was $5.00, but would only charge us $3.75   Uncle
Ren and Uncle Will have both thrown off a few sticks of wood occasionally
when passing.  When we asked Will Spendlove his price for taking you up
there, he said he was glad to do that much to help you.

     Well, good night and keep well.  Love from Mama.

     The dining table was the family social center.  When the leaves were UD
it could seat twelve people.  Usually, after the supper dishes were done, we
sat around the table with our school books and studied.  Sometimes we played
games, like "Up Jinks" or "Button, Button," or "Pox and Geese."  Our games
were all homemade, except,of course,Papa's checkers.
^ ^^istmas.t^\!'nnie gave the family a deck of ^inch cards. Durina
the holidays we played the game with fascination.  Never had we enjoyed a
holiday season more.  Day after day we played, until the game SeSm^an
-61-

an obsession.


     Once, when Papa asked us to set the table for supper, someone said,
"In a minute.  We are almost finished."

     Sternly Papa arose, demanded that we hand him our cards, then he threw
them in the fire.  We sat in stunned silence.  We couldn't believe he would
do such a thing to something that had brought so much pleasure.  It was
like a bereavement.  We were each crying bitterly within, but knew better
than to show any outward signs.  Instead, we quietly set the table.


                                 CHAPTER 12

              FROM CHILDHOOD TO ADOLESCENCE - OAK CREEK DAYS

       Oak Creek, my mother's childhood hometown, was situated inside of what

  is now Zion National Park, and covered the area from the Park Entrance and

  on up the canyon, beyond the present site of the Visitor's Center.  Grand-

  mother Crawford, and most of my Crawford cousins lived there.

      "Grandmother" meant Grandmother Crawford, and "Grandma" meant Grandma

 Isom.  That's how we distinguished between the two.  Grandmother was as

 homespun as Abe Lincoln and Grandma was as genteel as George Washington.

 Grandmother's home was as Early American as Grandma's was Old English.

      Thoughts of Grandmother bring memories of her spacious living room

 built onto the old log cabin.  The scrubbed pine board floors were bright-

 ened with braided scatter-rugs, and the walls were papered with slick

 magazine pages, fresh and fascinating, and the windows were hung with

 calico curtains.  A hand-carved mantle shelf topped the fireplace, and on

 it stood the pendulum clock that had ticked away the years, and standing

 beside the clock was the kerosene lamp.  Currier & Ives pictures hung on

 the wall, their home-made frames  intricate with woodcarvings of oak leaves

 and acorns.  Our Great-Grandfather, Samuel Kendall Gifford, was the crafts-

 man who made the Gifford chairs, and these were the kind used in Grandmother's

 home.  The woven, rawhide bottoms were cushioned with crazy patch, embroi-

 dered, velvet pillows.

      "Grandmother" is a world of memories to me.  It is her calico dress and

 her checkered, gingham apron with the cross stitch border.  It is the blue

 w,Lllowware dishes in her kitchen cupboard.  It is Grandfather's two  broad-

 brimmed, felt hats above the kitchen door, giving the impression that Grand-

 sS?rs andT barely.hun9 them on their pegs.  It is the spinning wheel up-

 stairs, and the affectionate sound of Aunt Emma's voice as she welcomed us

 each summer, and the sugar cookies, sprinkled with nutmeg in the blue crock
andcoldfr:Led chlcken ona plate'  Itis P^^ Pl^P, Yellow currants an^

 overbearing strawberries in the garden, and gathering big, brown eggs from
the clean nests burrowed into the haystack by the speckled hens.  it is the
bird-of-paradise blooming by her kitchen door.  It is everything that sends
my blood racing with the happiness of childhood.  "Grandmother" and "Oak
Creek" are synonymous to me.
»o n, T^ our T^ from oak creek ^^g^ iheir grain to the grist mill
Tf S e?^ c?ardenhoes smoke» be"^ we could go with them to Grandmother's
uncle Dan o^n^l  T?  one- • we rode in the wa^on with either Unc^Le^
Then'we'rode StTh^ unt11 uncle Johnny started drivin^ th- -il t^.

                                    -62-

      It was a day's journey by team.  The dirt roads were rough and

 deeply rutted.  Dust poufed up from the horses' hooves, and squirted from

 the ruts as the wagon wheels jogged along, settling thick over us and the

 sacks of "grist." •  The clopping of the horses and the creaking of the

 wagon lulled us and we learned to sleep, our heads bouncing against a

 sadc of flour or thumping against the bare boards in the bottom of the

 wagon.  By the time we arrived at Grandmother's house we peered from

 dust-rimmed eyes, like furry racoons.  The water bucket  with the gray

 enamel dipper in it, and the wash basin, soap, and towel were ready for us

 on a bench by the door.  After the first night at Grandmother's, our

 cousins showed up and it was decided who should have the honor of hosting

 us for the rest of our precious week.

      Our Oak Creek and Springdale cousins were not just ordinary people.

 They were especially created to live in Paradise.  (Oak Creek and Spring-

 dale. )  Oak Creek and Springdale were only two miles apart and we were

 related to everyone who lived in both places, except the Langston family.

 Grandmother had thirteen children, and some of her children had eleven

 thirteen, and fifteen children.  So we had cousins by the dozens, and '

 every one of them was special in a wonderful way.

      Our "up-river" cousins can best be explained by saying they were a

 part of the canyon, a canyon made deep by towering peaks of brilliant hues

 Our cousins were as refreshing as the canyon breeze that came every mom-

 ing, sweet with the scent of boxelder, and as joyous as the river rippling

 over rocks. How else can I say how much I loved them? I will introduce

 those nearest my age.

      Elva belonged to Uncle Lewis and Aunt Mary Crawford.  She was just my

 age.  Aunt Mary came from the south, bringing with her that southern
hospitality.  She talked and laughed, and listened to Elva and me as thouch

 we were grownups.  She and Uncle Lewis used to take their hoes and shovels

 to the field and work together, coming in together at meal time.  Each
summer, when we were there. Aunt Mary packed the picnic basket while Uncle
Lewis hitched up the team, and we would spend one day at Raspberry Bend
in Zion.  Raspberry Bend is the big bend in the river between Weeping Rock
and the parking lot in the Narrows.  Grandfather used to have a corn patch
there and I am of the impression it was he who originally planted the
raspberries.  Back to their home in the evening. Uncle Lewis used to sit
on the front step and play his harmonica under the stars.

     Leata was my age,too, and belonged to Uncle Dan and Aunt Sarah Craw-
ford.  Usually, I said "Leata and Elva" in one breath, because these two
cousins lived close together and we always played together.  Leata was the
witty one, reminding me of Edith.  Aunt Sarah was fastidious, and Leata
could not go to play until the house was shiny slick.

     Mary Gifford was a year older than I and belonged to Uncle John and
Aunt Fanny Gifford.  They lived half-way between Oak Creek and Sprinqdale
I loved to show up at their place just before sundown, because I knew
S^^ FSSny^Ida'   Inez or Lella would stir u? a bat^ of corn bread

   wn^^^^^^^           y-^X^^^^ ?he

                     ST Aun-anny^came^ Sos: ^^^

* Grist was the flour, bran and cereal made from the grain.

                                   -63-

 were my own age.  We never talked much, because she was quiet, but she

 poured out her inner feelings in letters to me, and always sent cards

 for no occasion especially, except that it was springtime or harvest time.

 One card I cherished until the edges became soft and frayed was a picture

 of a rainbow above an apple orchard in full bloom.

      Rupert Ruesch belonged to Uncle Walter and Aunt Marilla Ruesch, who

 lived in Springdale.  He was a year older than I and couldn't really be

 bothered with girl cousins.  But Aunt Marilla's scintillating wit and
Uncle Walter's colorful language, made visiting at their house something
we wouldn't dream of missing.

      Heber belonged to Uncle Sammy and Aunt Emmie Crawford.  To get to
their place, we went over a swinging bridge across the river.  Uncle
Sammy was a skilled carpenter, and so was Heber.  Heber's miniature barns,

 corrals,and houses in their back yard  were the cleverest I had ever seen,
and playing with his spool wagons over the winding roads under the shade
trees was cool fun.

      Reuben belonged to Uncle Jim and Aunt Ellen Crawford, and he was no
more interested in playing with girls than Rupert was.  Uncle Jim and Aunt
Ellen made up for this default.  Uncle Jim used to play his wind-up phono-
graph for us.  The records were cylinder shaped and the sound came out of
a big, blue petunia-shaped horn.  Aunt Ellen fried up heaps of rabbit meat,
golden and crusty.  It was good, but I couldn't eat it, because I had spent
too much time leaning over the rabbit pen, watching the big-eyed, furry
soft babies play.

     Norman belonged to Uncle Johnny and Aunt Eliza.  He was half-way be-
tween Mildred and me, and more interested in her.  Aunt Eliza, Susan and
Lucy made me feel cuddled and loved.  Because they lived next door to
Grandmother and Aunt Emma, I felt that their household was one and the
same.

     Besides the Uncles, Aunts and Cousins, there were Grand-Uncles and
Aunts.  Especially Uncle Freeborn and Aunt Jane, and Uncle Moses and Aunt
Airy Gifford.  Uncle Freebom and Aunt Jane ran an ice cream parlor in
Springdale.  Besides ice cream, they sold chocolates, the old fashioned
bon-bon kind that came in wooden buckets.  It was wonderful to have a grand-
uncle who had these things, because that made them free to us.  I figured
anyone who owned a store could have anything they wanted for nothing.
Aunt Jane always set us down to a big bowl of home-made ice cream and Uncle
Freeborn doled out the chocolates.  This was before the days of electricity
in Springdale, which made summertime ice cream more exotic.

     Uncle Freeborn had an ice pond in Oak Creek Canyon.  In the winter he
ran a thin layer of water into the pond, letting it freeze.  On top of
this he ran another layer and so on, until he could saw solid blocks of
ice from the pond.  He hauled these by team and wagon to his shed in Spring-
dale, and packed them in sawdust.  The ice lasted all summer in this insu-
lation.

     Sometimes in the summertime, his team would pull into our yard in Hurr-
icane.  Packed in his wagon, well-wrapped in ice and quilts, was a five
gallon freezer of ice cream to share with ours and Aunt Mary Stout's families.
^•^ uncleMoses bought treats from Springdale, too.  Those flour sacks,
filled with yellow transparent apples in the spring were mighty welcome.

                                 -64-
He used to compose songs and poems to sing and recite at parties.  They
were humorous and he was a fun granduncle, but sometimes I wished he'd
leave Aunt Airy (Aranna) home, for often, when he was at his best, she'd
say,"Oh,Moses," in such an unflattering way, and then he'd quit.

     I saw little of Mildred during our week together at Oak Creek, for
she was off with Merle and Myrtle being a butterfly with the older cousins.
She felt beautiful, desirable and free as a butterfly, and that everybody
loved her.  Consequently, everybody did.  All the while, I was having a
grubby good time, crawling along on Heber's spool wagon roads, or snagging
my dresses on bushes and ledges.

     Once Uncle Lewis gave Elva, Leata and me a ripe watermelon.  We decided
to eat it above the ledges below the Watchman.  The melon was heavy, so
we changed off often, taking turns carrying it up the steep foothills.  The
last pitch, lugging the melon past the ledges,was almost too much.  Finally,
we sat panting   precariously above a cliff, clutching our treasure.  One
of us moved, and the melon rolled out of reach, over the edge of the cliff,
and smashed to bits down below.

     Swimming in the river in old dresses and bloomers, was a popular sport
with the Oak Creek and Springdale cousins.  The swimming holes were some-
thing more than belly-crawling in the Hurricane Canal.  I only had to be
pulled out twice  to realize that I could swim in knee-deep water only.

     Finally came a summer when spool wagons, crawling in the dirt, and
puddle wading seemed kid stuff to me.  Just before I was fourteen  came
the glorious, three day, Crawford reunion.  I discovered that my uncles and
older cousins were amused at my wise cracks, which made my blood race and
my head feel keen.  I discovered also that boys were fun to flirt with.
Even uncles teased in a fun-filled way, especially Uncle Jake Crawford,
whom we seldom saw, because he and his family were globe-trotters.  His boy
Earl was about my age, and very polite.  I didn't understand why he always
said "Sir," or "Mam," but it had a charm, like reading a book.  Aunt Effie's
deep blue eyes rimmed with thick, dark lashes, and dark hair was very pretty.

     The following was recorded in my diary: "Elva, Venona, Leata, Edith and
I hiked up in a canyon east of Uncle Sammy's.  We came back with our arms
full of beautiful wild flowers and our mouths full of wonderful pine gum. .
. . At meal times there were one-hundred and seven hungry stomachs to fill.
It was wash, wash, wash dirty dishes and serve, serve, serve hungry people.
Leata, Edith and I gathered peppermint and made some tea.  We passed a cup
of tea down the table and all of the men smelled it and passed it on until
it came to Uncle Jake and he said if we would turn our heads he would drink
it.  When we looked back, the cup was empty.  I told him I didn't believe
he drank it, so he put his arms around me and marched me to Mama and said,
'Annie, have you ever caught me in a lie?'  Mama said,  'Why no.'   'Well, if
you can show me the tea, I'll believe you drank it,' I said and everyone
laughed.  Uncle Jake took Leata and I with him after he drank our tea, and
he was as much fun as a kid."

     But this reunion!  There were long tables in Uncle Johnny's yard, and
someone was always setting it or clearing it.  Roving crowds were always
eating.  I never saw Mama during the whole time, except briefly   I learned
she never got out of the kitchen, and that she was against three-dav
reunions.                                                             Y
.65-


      Carl Crawford had a car - and at last, I was young lady enough to go

 for a ride with my older cousins.  I wore the soft  royal-blue  satin

 jumper dress that Grandma Isom had made me.  I felt as lovely as a movie star.

 Carl took us to see the new Rockville Bridge.  To give us a thrill, he

 floor-boarded the gas, and going over the bridge, hit a rut.  I was in the

 bade seat, and was thrown against the car top, skinning my nose against

 the hardwood bow.  My face swelled and went black around my eyes.  Worse

 still, the blue satin dress came apart.  It was a tiered skirt, and each

 tier separated, leaving the cording and satin hanging.  Like Cinderella,

 my finery had turned to rags.  There was one saving grace; this was the

 last afternoon of the reunion.

                                CHAPTER 13

                             "Goodbye, Grandma"

                                   (1924)

      In the spring, Mildred graduated from the ninth grade.  Grandma said

 school was just a waste of time for Mildred anyway, because she was the

  marrying kind".  She should have said "romantic kind", because Mildred

 loved everybody, and took it for granted that everybody loved her.  Occas-

 ionally someone even referred to her as "the pretty one".  Now I wouldn't

 go so far as to say that.  When it came to looks, she really didn't have

 anything over on the rest of us.

      But she had a good disposition.  She never got angry, and she was good

 to everybody.  She didn't even have fun indulging in witty sarcasm.  She
^T ^i3.31"^ tMngs that felt good on the ton9ue• In fa^ she never
said anything bad about anyone, no matter how funny it might have been
She was simply a happy person, who liked to make other people happy.
n^rio ^h-?^?^^ t0 work for Mattie Ruesch in ^edonia, she promptly
made a hit with the Fredoma boys, especially Maurice Judd.  When she
m^^oned- ^ i" her letters to home, I knew instantly that this was "love
deeP^isfacfe'LT9 between the lines in each of her ^-TT-sighed with
br-^h^ ^ Matheson ^.^ill dating Annie, even bringing his sister and
brothers to see us. Just like I figured he should.  I liked the idea of
getting a lot of in-law relatives.
^ ^.^ working for a Marsh family in Cedar City, and with Mildred
away, Annie and I became close companions.  My diary entry of June 11, is
as roJLiows i                                                               •

      Last Sunday, Annie and I gathered up a stack of old Juveniles, and

      went upon the hill to read.  We found a shady spot in Uncle Lew's

      5^ SV^ ^ enough for hoth of us* we sat down a^ ^ead a con-

      tinued love story.  Annie can make a love story sound enthralling

      when she reads.  We read until we were tired, then put a big rock

      on the magazines we had finished, and took the remaining six in

      St^a^^^0^ chinatown- We walked and wa^ed ovS one
-66-


       At last, at the crest of-one little hill, our gaze rested

       upon a semi-circle of beautiful pale blue, pink and white

       mountains along the eastern horizon.  "Look!" I said to

       Annie.  She said "Hurrahl   We have been rewarded for our

       long walk." We could see two white peaks of mountains that

       sent a thrill of joy and homesick longing through me.  It

       was my mountain home.  My Kolobt

       We walked on to the Chinatown Wash and sat down and finished

       our love story.  As we turned toward home, a lone coyote

       trotted in and out among the gray bushes.

       "Hi there," Annie called.  The gaunt, ragged animal sat upon

       his haunches, turned his inquisitive nose toward us, pricked

       up his pointed ears, gave us one inquiring glance, then

       trotted off, this time faster than before.

       We gave a last, longing look at our mountains and turned

       toward home.  We arrived just at chore time.

     At the spring closing of Primary, I graduated from the Sea Gull class.

 Boys graduated from Primary at the age of twelve, because of the Scout
program, but girls just grew bigger and bigger for the next two years and
stayed in Primary coloring pictures of pioneers until they were fourteen.
Aunt Mina Hinton  was the Primary President, and had been ever since Hurri-

 cane was settled.  She also led the singing.  Aunt Mina was Primary, and
we loved her, but I resented the fact that boys could go to Mutual two
years before girls could.

     Both Grandma and Papa constantly reminded me that fourteen was plenty
young to start going out at nights.  I lived for my fourteenth birthday,
because on that day I would automatically be grown-up, and would no longer
have Grandma hounding me to go to the Primary dances.  She had warned me
and forewarned me, that if I didn't learn to dance in Primary, I'd be a
social failure.  But who wanted to dance with those little kids ?

     Well!  What a shock I was in for when I went to my first "grown-up"
dance.  The other girls my age were swinging about the floor with ease and
grace, and I didn't have the least idea of which foot to put where.  Bash-
fully, I sat on the sideline, fearful that someone would ask me to dance.
Well, no one did, and fifteen minutes sitting there  seemed forever.  I
remembered a wisecrack about Wall Flowers trying to look like American
Beauties, and felt self conscious, so I slipped out the door and ran home,

     On August 6, the day before Mama's birthday, Grandma cooked a fine
spread and invited our aunts and uncles, and Mama and Papa, to dinner.
When it came to cooking. Grandma was the best, and this time she did it
up royally.

     In the evening, when I went to her house to go to bed, the reminiscing
and laughter was still going on.  And then. Grandma went into one of her
"heart spells",   I wanted to massage the pain away, but my aunts said.
"Don't worry about Ma, Alice, we'll take care of her."
-Thenight was hotf s0 I ^ down with "Y q"ilt and pillow on Grandma's
por^ ^ ^se  Y s ould need me- Grandma ^Y3 said th^ "° one else
could rub her anns and back the way I could.  Her cries of distress

                                   -67-
were terrible and I knew they should call roe, but they didn't.  Then I dozed.

     Pretty soon Aunt Alice shook me.  "Alice, Ma is dead," she said.

     "Oh," I groaned, relieved for Grandma, but ashamed of being thankful
that it was all over.  I had been alone with her in her agony for so long,
for so excruciatingly, terribly long, and had pictured myself running at
2:00 a.m. through the dark to our house, to wake Mama and Papa to tell
them Grandma was dead.

     But it didn't happen that way.  She passed away at 10:00 p.m.,
surrounded by-her children, at the age of seventy-six.  Grandpa had been
gone for thirty-nine years, and now Grandma, who had loved him so dearly,
was with him again.

     Throughout the years, her children had come to see her as often as
possible.  Aunt Ellen came daily.  Grandma often said<"Oh Ellen, you
shouldn't traipse across town just to see me," and Aunt Ellen would kiss
her and say» "I had to see that you were well, Ma."  Aunt Mary and Aunt
Alice also came often, but not every day.  And Papa was an absolute Mother-
worshipper.

     Once, when I complained that I did not like my name because it was
too common. Papa's eyes filled with tears and he said,"We gave you the
most beautiful name on earth - the name of my mother."

     And now Grandma was gone, but her name would live on.  Besides Aunt
Alice, Grandma had had six grand-daughters named Alice.  But I was the
only Alice Isom.

     Grandma's burial clothes were neatly pressed and folded in a dresser
drawer.  She had shown them to me, explaining what to do, and she had her
funeral planned,too.  She said}"I want Kate Spendlove to sing, because she
has such a beautiful voice."  Kate was Aunt Ellen's daughter.  Grandma
wanted no speakers-- only a testimony meeting, and her wish was granted.
She was buried beside Grandpa in the Virgin cemetery.  As they lowered
her into the grave, the people sang "Nearer My God to Thee".

     Grandma had willed her house to Mama and its contents to her dau-
ghters.  After the funeral, the family stayed to divide her belongings.
This shocked me.  It was hard to realize that she was really gone.

     In the years that followed, I heard Grandma cry out in my dreams and
I got up to rub her back.  Papa shouted at me until I awoke and went back
to bed.  Night after night I saw the hurt look on Grandma's face as I
dreamed she returned to find her house empty.  The emotional strain of
taking care of her through these painful "heart spells" had left a scar
that only time could erase.

     But time can never erase the influence she had upon the lives of all
of us.  Memories of her will always come crowding ba'ck to warm my heart.
She was a great lady, and did her best to make a lady out of me.

     "Every girl should leam to sew a fine seam by hand," she used to say.
"When I was a girl, every stitch I had on, but my shoes, I made myself."

     Grandma was skilled at knitting, crocheting, tatting and macrame, and
was a one-woman production line.  But her big thing was to see that every
grand-daughter learned to sew by hand before she touched a sewing machine.
So she organized a sewing class, teaching her grand-daughters to make doll
dresses.  The class stopped when it got to me.  I was her private struggle.

                                   -68-

      Because I slept at her house, my evenings were spent piecing quilt

 blocks.  I hated the sewing, but loved the lamp.  The shade was a smooth

 glass bowl, milk-white underneath and robin-egg blue on the outside.  My

 stitches were crooked and ugly.  I filled a cardboard box with miserable

 blocks, not one of them fit to go into a quilt top.  The box, blocks and

 all were probably burned when Grandma's things were divided, since no one

 ever confronted me with them.

      Grandma either read, or reminisced to me as I struggled with my needle.

 She loved to remember her courting days.  She was the"Belle of the Ball",

 and in demand for her beautiful singing voice.  As she talked, I could see

 her spinning and weaving and pouring tallow candles, or swirling through

 a square dance, showing the lace on her many petticoats.  Ah, no doubt

 she was a proud beauty.  She boasted that her bosom was so high and firm,

 that she could set a match-box on top and it would not fall off.  I don't

 doubt it, for she still wore starched ruffles under her dresses that gave

 her the same high curve.  Wasp waists were popular when she was a girl.

 If the young man who came courting  could span the young lady's waist with

 both hands, hers was a beautiful figure.  To her dying day. Grandma was

 still so tightly laced  her waist couldn't expand.  She would have fallen

 apart without her corsets.

      Grandma admonished us to never kiss a boy until becoming his wife.

 "The first time I ever kissed your Grandfather  was over the altar," she

 said, and this was no doubt true.  Still, I admired the story the master

 of c:eremonies told on Grandma at an "Old Folks*s" party one night.

      When Grandpa was courting her, so the story goes, he kissed her good-

 night at the gate.

      "George! You shouldn't have done thati" she said in exasperation.

 "No boy has ever kissed me before!"

     Just then Albert Stratton and James Jepson jumped out from behind
the bushes where they had been hiding.

      "Never mind, George," Albert said, "that's what she told us when we
kissed her goodnight."

     The story impressed me and I regarded Grandma with new interest.

     Grandma saved everything.  In her upstairs were white flour sacks
filled with bits of silk, ribbon and lace.  Everything that could possibly
be worked into a quilt or a rag rug or made over into dresses, was
already done up.  These tiny scraps were for making a rose bud for a hat
or a bow on a dress.  She always tacked a lace medallion or a bow  here or
there, on the dresses she made for us.

     Grandma's world was satin, velvet, fluted crystal, hand painted china
and silver— in other words, elegant.  Oh, we were going to miss her a-
plenty.  She had been so much a part of our daily lives, so much a part of
the^very fiber of our souls.  And now, because I was exactly her namesake,
I liked the idea that I had a personal representative in Heaven.

     Becoming a Bee Hive girl was my next important milestone.  The Bee
Hive book, my teacher Lena Isom, gave me, was my prize possession.  Up-
stairs in my room, I pored over the list of things I could do ^o fiU
"cells".    For the first time, I discovered that Actually ego^d making

                                    -69-

 my bed, because I was earning "cells".  Ideas for things I could do for my

 room began to take shape.  How intriguing was my sunflower, crystalized in a

 saltpeter solution, and the hooked rug I made from burlap and worn out wool

 dresses, and the cushion made from new scraps.

      Sometimes Lena had us come to her home for classes.  On  one of these

 evenings, a cloud burst came.  With the first lull in the storm, we scur-

 ried out the door toward home.  We were almost to the corner  when light-

 ning struck the transformer on the power pole there.  We were scared

 enough at the white light that sputtered and burned, but the black cat

 that streaked across the sidewalk in front of us made it worse.  With a

 hoarse squawk. Fern Ruesch clutched my arm.

      "Come back, come back, don't go over that line," she cried.

      And then, down came the rain again.  Although it meant walking two

 blocks further through the downpour, we had to go home another way to

 avoid stepping over the path of the black cat.

      It wasn't that we were superstitious —goodness no!  It's just that

 we couldn't take a chance on a black cat bringing bad luck.  Besides that,

 superstitions are sometimes a lot of fun, like getting a first glimpse of

 the new moon over your left shoulder and making a wish.  Sometimes we had

 to  chisel a little on that one, because until we knew just where the new

 moon was, we couldn't turn our back to it. and look over our left shoulder.

 But when I got the new moon just right, I always made a wish quickly, be-

 fore my eyes were diverted.  I kept two standard wishes on hand.  One was

 for a house full of gold, or else a golden doll.  The other was that I

 could have every wish granted that I ever wished.  I knew I'd never get

 either, but I wouldn't have felt right about not making them.

      I was in the eighth grade now, with Will Woodbury as my teacher.
Will had^a rich voice, which was wonderful when he gave dramatic readings.
He had his gentle and tender moments, but was fiercely stern when the
situation required it.

     One day, when the class got a little out of hand, he kept us all in,
and made us march in the awkward squad.  The embarrassing thing was  that
the Fredonia basketball team had just arrived for the game that night
Maurice Judd, Mildred's boyfriend, was on the team.  Mildred had previously
brought Maruice to meet the family, and all of us had fallen in love with
him.  I didn't want Maurice to see me marching in the awkward squad, but I
had no choice.

     Mr. Woodbury marched us down the hall  and outside into lineup for-
mation.  Then we marched in again, and out again, into lineup formation,
in again, and out again, over and over.  He escorted us all the while
stomping his left foot, clapping his hands and loudly shouting, "Left
right, left right."  At first, the whole class giggled.  The Fredonia
team looked on with ill-concealed amusement.  Mr. Woodbury»s face became
a l:!-vldredand vei1^ stood out on his forehead.  Back and forth we marched
until the class sobered up.  Mr. Woodbury was thorough and always won his
point.                                                              -

     Across from me in our Geography class, sat a girl that I'll call Nellie
To my Quaker standards, she was empty.headed and overpainted   Her eve
lashes were gobbed together with stuff like black wagon grease  ner See
caked with powder white as flour and her cheeks paint'ed ll^^T^es

                                   -PO-

 of brilliant red.  She never participated in class, but remained silent.

 The only important thing to me was to be able to get "A's" on my report

 card, so I regarded Nellie as dull.

      When our Geography teacher, Eldon Larsen (Karl's brother) said,

 "Alice, I want you and Nellie to stay after school," I was in shock.  Kids
who had to stay in  were in trouble.

     After the class had filed out, Mr. Larsen flatly stated, "Your exam-

 ination papers are identical.  One of you copied."

      Hotly I thought, if one of us copied, he should know which one it was.

 Didn't our past records speak for us?  As I saw it, to cheat was the lowest,

 the most despicable thing a human could do, and yet I was being accused.

 "I have never copied anyone's papers in my life!" I spluttered.

      "One of you copied," he insisted.

      Contemptuously I thought, even if I wanted to cheat, I wouldn't copy

 from her. Angry tears splashed down my cheeks and Nellie began to bawl
too, but her red eyes were hidden behind the brim of her pink felt hat
that fit like a bowl over half her face.  How I wished I had a hat like
hers at that moment!

      "You both realize that to let someone copy your paper, is also cheat-
ing," Mr. Larsen continued.

      "I don't let people copy my papers," I blubbered.

      "How about you?" he turned to Nellie.

     Black tears streaked her face.  "I didn't do it," she sniffled.

     Neither of us had handkerchiefs.  Mr. Larsen shook his head at our
drizzling and sniffling and dismissed us. I suddenly realized that Nellie
was far smarter than I had supposed, for how on earth could she copy my
paper without my knowing it?

     Mr. Larsen never did apologize to me, although I felt that he should.
All he did was grade my Geography paper with an "A"..

     One day, I got a letter from a girl in Cape Town, South Africa.  She
had found my address in the Instructor.  I could hardly contain my excite-
ment, and replied by return mail.  The girl's name was Olive, and she sent
me pictures and news clippings about Cape Town and told me about the Mormon
Church there.  Her father was a branch president.

     Africa seemed as remote to me as the planet Jupiter, and I cherished
everything she sent.  And I felt certain that she too would be happy for
any little thing from America, so for Christmas, I sent her a little
celluloid kewpie doll, that I had dressed with red satin ribbon.  The
doll was something I personally would have loved to receive.  In the
meantime. Olive had asked me for a boy pen pal, and I had sent her my
cousin's name, Edwin Stout.  Little did I dream that she imagined herself
deeply in love with him, and that she was making plans to come to the United
States to marry him.  She laughed at my doll, and wrote Edwin  saying that I
was a ninny.  Many other things she said  that should never have been writ-
ten.  Aunt Mary saw the letter and brought it to Mama.  They were both up-
set, and Edwin and I immediately lost our pen pal
-71-


      Papa owned the first Holstein animals in Hurricane.  He had a registered

 bull and cow shipped from New York, which he proudly displayed to anyone who

 would look over our corral fence.  Marion, the cow, was a wonderful producer,

 and people came from all quarters of town with their bottles to buy baby

 milk.  One afternoon, when Wilson Imlay's big red bull heard Papa's Holstein

 bellowing, he broke out of his corral.  Both bulls rumbled back and forth at

 each other all the while the Imlay animal ambled across town.  By the time it

 reached our place, our bull had broken out into the street where they both

 met head on, pawing dirt.  My sisters and I were in the yard watching.  The

 bulls thundered around the comer to our front fence, where their massive

 hulks smashed through the pickets as though they were match sticks.  We ran

 into the grainery and peeked out the door.

      Hearing the rumbling and bellowing. Uncle Lew came running.  "Here

 here now," he called, waving a spindly little stick.                   '

      I expected to see Uncle Lew flattened and trampled, but the animals pa.-d

 no attention to him.  Finally, men on horses came, breaking up the fight

 which seemed a pity, for seldom did we get to see such a spectacle.  Mama was

 relieved.  She confessed that she was afraid the bulls would bump into the

 grainery and it would collapse with us in it.

 •    pa?^ took a pride in his anilnals-  He subscribed to "The Holstein Fris-

 ian World,  and eventually bought other Holsteins from New York.  Later  of

 course, he raised his own.

      Our cows were trained to be milked from either side.  When Edith sat on

 one side of the cow and I on the other, she made me feel inferior, because '
she squirted the milk in a steady stream raising a two inch foam on her

 bucket.  Laboriously, I squeezed out thin little souirts so slowly that it

 cooled and the cream almost raised in my bucket.  But I tried.  One thino in
my favor was that the cows were usually patient.  All but old Agnes.  She'd
stand just so long, then she'd give me a bat on the head with a tail that
felt weighted with lead, then she'd either step in the bucket, or kick it over.

   ^ Agnes usually worked up to a climax and had to be thrashed once a month.
Eacn day she'd gradually get ornier and ornier until she became impossible,
then Mama would take a whip to her.  The whipping made her contrite for a
couple or weeks, then gradually she'd start getting fidgety again.

 4-  ,,oncewhen  Kate  was  helping  me  milk,   Agnes   pressed  her  head  aoainst  the
staole gate.                                                        ^

     "Oh, look at the poor thing," Kate bewailed.   "She must have a headache."

     Old Agnes heaved a sigh and rubbed her head sadly against the top board.

     "Poor, poor cow," Kate soothed, "don't you feel good?"

     Just then Agnes swatted, wrapping the long hair of her tail around Kate's
head.  At the same time, she sent the bucket of milk flying.  Then she darted
for her usual race around the corral, but this time somethinc was different"
During the night the water trough had run over, and low temperatures had made
a skating rink out of part of the corral.  Agnes bolted onto the ice and her
feet sprawled out.  Wild eyed she stood, unable to move.

                                    -72-

      My, what a joyful gleam Mama got in her eyes when she surveyed the

 situation.  Always before, when Agnes got her monthly tune up. Mama had had

 to chase her around inside the corral.  This time the cow was trapped.

 Triumphantly, Mama picked up the whip and gave Agnes her just dues, then left

 her to think it over until the sunshine softened the ice.  Agnes was a con-

 trite cow for a long, long time after that.

      When I was younger, it was hard to decide which was the most perfect

 Christmas gift, new shoes or a doll.  New shoes thrilled me clear through,

 and dolls were a lasting love that could never diminish.  But, at the age

 of fourteen, I discovered a Christmas gift that was greater than either of

 these when Kate gave me a book.  In books one can travel far and meet such

 interesting people.  Kate gave me the book, "Keeper of the Bees" by Gene

 Stratton Porter.  Each afternoon during the holidays, when the sun streamed

 into my upstairs bedroom, I curled up and read.  Ah, such rapture!

                                  CHAPTER 14

                        If Birds Can Fly, Why Can't I?

                                     (1925)

      April 13.  Saturday after scrubbing the front room floor, I put on my
overalls and middy and Edith and I went Eastering with Venona Stout, Kate

 Humphries, Lawrence Stout, and Marcus Campbell.  We hiked up the canyon above
the Sulphur Springs.  The air was sparkly spring and the river a clear trickle
After we had eaten our picnic, we hiked back toward the bridge.

      "Hey, this is my island," Mark said as he jumped to a little sandbar in

 the river.  With his hands he scooped out a pond in the sand.

      "I'll have this peninsula," Edith announced.

      We all got landlord fever, and with rocks, weeds, and wet sand dribblinc
through our fingers, we built little castles.

     From the LaVerkin side of the canyon we heard galloping horses, the
clatter or a wagon, and a man frantically yelling, "Woa!"

      "It's a runaway!" Mark shouted.

     Racing through the shallow water for a better view, we saw a team of
horses tearing around the bend, their tails and manes flying.

     "Woa, woa," the driver cried, straining on the reins.

     The wagon bounced and leaped at the horses' heels as they bolted down the
dugway.  Instead of making the turn at the bridge, they crashed throuah the
railing.  The wagon, with its few bales of hay, literally exploded on'the bank
below, and the dazed horses clopped out into the water and stood, silertly
subdued, their broken harnesses and reins danglina.  The man had leaped to
safety on the bridge.

     Suddenly, I realized that Edith was nowhere in siohfc.  When I last saw
her, she was running for cover under the bridge.  With^a sickening sensation
I knew she had not made it.  The runaway outfit had come too fast, and she
was buried beneath the wreckage, where a cloud of dust still hovered

                                  -73-

      Panic se-'ized me.  Then I saw a blonde head poking up from behind a

  boulder. It was Edith!  Her face was paper-white and the pupils of her eves

  dilated big and black.                                                    -

     ^During the past winter, Kate lived with Uncle John and Aunt Evadna

 Hopkins, and attended the Cedar High.  While there, she made application

  for summer work with the Utah Parks and was given a job in Zion Canyon

 In her brief interlude between school and Zion, she helped Aunt Alice

 Spendlove.  When the time came for her to leave, she attempted to break

 me in on the job.

      The last morning before she left, she took me into Aunt Alice's

 kltchs; toflx breakfa^.  While I watched, she scooped flour from the bin

 S^ s^' ^pooned ln some baking powder and added a g006 sized pinch

  •s1* NexfcT she worked ln a hunk of shortening and poured in just enough

 milk to make the dough right for rolling and cutting.  When she took tne

 A^S^3  S theoven* the^ were g01^ ^d puffy, and Uncle Will and Aunt

 Alice bragged on her.

 scareS! w ^^oTMT^' I pleaded' "plea8e ^ g0' Kate-  I-

 =l«n"^\^S S^S.^"- Au she nMds " s°'Be°ne to keep the houae

 doesn'.'?1^'^^^' "I d"esn't c°ok for other people- lihtt " lt

      "You'll do all right.  Don't worry."

 onn  ^ ^ mornin9 I stood helplessly in Aunt Alice's kitchen.  Kate was

 gone and I was on my own.  Through the open door I heard the corral gate

 SS^ h c^ 11 ^d gone t0 tend the horses and milk the c^- Hi would

 ^ o^oTown^chS^ when he came in- I lon9ed for the comforti^

 while^^rk^6 Per^^wou^ h^p"0^"9 done- Nama always sang

 iTn.l  Resolutely».I scooped flour into the sifter as Kate had done.   When

 Uncle Will came in with the milk, I was singing "Sweet birds, oh say that
my lover is true," and stirring a big batch of something,  plour w2 soUl

 ing around the edge of the pan onto the table.                         p

 "And t'o^nin^^^hou^^' singing while You work*" uncle wi11 remarked.

 w.iu T-O rninK, i thought you were afraid."

     So he thought I- was afraid!  Well, if he only knew!  That quaver in mv
^Wh^ wo^aticvlb^ But I sang, and mixed, and ronT^d cu^
My!  What a big pan of biscuits- three times as many as Kate had made.

     As I popped them into the oven, confidence stirred within me   WMI^ 4-ho
biscuits baked, I put a fresh cloth on the table.  A^er setSno th^l
I put on the milk and apple butter, then scrambled ^e^ggs  'Scramble ^
less fussy than worrying about a perfect yolk.  Uncle Will askP?T^ M   s
w^e a^c ^goS" for the golden) n^ ^sc;^11^" ^led^9'

     "Oh!" I cried in dismay.

                                   -74-

       "Did you burn you?" Aunt Alice called.

      "No.  I'm all right," I fibbed.  A burn would have been mild compared

 to what I was feeling as I looked at the pan of sodden blobs.  What did I

 do wrong?

      "Good.  Now hurry with the biscuits, the eggs are getting cold."

      Well!  There was no use crawling to the table with them, even if I

 did feel low.  Taking a plate from the cupboard, I heaped the biscuits

 high.  At least there were plenty.  Setting them in front of Uncle Will, I

 hurried back to the kitchen, for fear I would cry.

      "Aren't you going to eat?" Aunt Alice asked.

      "I forgot something," I replied.

      "Everything is on.  Come eat your breakfast while it's hot."

      Might as well face it, I thought, so I slid into my chair.

      "Guess I'll go fishing today," Uncle Will said, straining to lift a

 biscuit.

      "Nonsense.  You know you never fish," Aunt Alice remarked.

      "But with these sinkers I could fish the very bottom of Blue Springs."

      My face burned.

      Holding a biscuit above the table in his right hand, he let it fall

 at the same time bringing his left hand down with a heavy thud. His eves

 twinkled and I knew he was teasing.

      "Eat your breakfast. Will," Aunt Alice said, "the biscuits are right

 tasty."  She had spread one with apple-butter and was eating it as thouah

 it was good.

      Uncle Will bit at one with pretended effort.  "Ow, ow, I think I broke

 something," he said grabbing his jaw.

      He was funny, and I laughed, in spite of myself, and then buttered a

 nunT       a bite" zt wasntt bad at allf ^P^131^ ^ °"<s was

     Uncle Will ate at least three of them.  "A very substantial breakfast,"
he said, patting my back as he left the room.                             '

     As I cleaned the kitchen, I mulled over the problem of disposing of the
heap of left-over biscuits.  It was no use putting them in the bread box
because Uncle Will would tease me every time he saw them.  I couG sneak'
them to the pigpen, but those big, fat pigs were used to good sweet corn
and would probably root the biscuits out of the trough along with the cor^
cobs  and then I_d rea^y get laughed at.  If I threw them LS the cana?
they'd probably float through the headgate and onto the garden.  I'd^ve^
hear the last of that.  I was afraid to take them to our own pig for Sa?
he wouldn't eat them.  If Mama saw them in the trough, she'd ask questions.
4-v-  4.  sinceuncle  wm  was  such  a  ^""enfc,   the  only  way  I  could  be  certain

                                                                .^.s-
=",» sr^".;".^ -' £."'^5 s-»; sr,^; „

                               -75-

  S^-mad^o b^SS? PI ^ ^tThe

  s^^Lr^^^^^^

  £^ ^Tnung^y

                                                       ^-

  loo. l^,^ across £0°?^°"^ TT-  U9h' I thought. I

  hem, when Aunt Alice called, "Surry^lce^na sho1 "T^.l0 baste "P the

  realized there wasn't a chance  KloS^^0"    °" lt l°oks."  I

  dress,                    cnance, so I pulled the thread out and modeled the

      "Now Alice, you look lovely," she said with pride

  wear S^s0 Srougn'town'lo s'no-w S^ere": - lra?ting that I

  so feeling old fashioned and queS I^kri^^     m getting ^ ^ lt>

  mulberry clump when a car passSa^y1               al<:e I hld llehlnd a

 Allce'woSdn'.t1 n^e^.'1^ ^SckT' lt belonged- hoplng ^

 me and said, "Alice, I didnt^n1 ? hS^ ^hepeered over her a1"565 «t

 off and I'll let the hindSwn fSr you1"        hat dress ^ short-  Tak^ "

 the drL"^ ?^\^ ^n:"'" I "P11^. ^t 1 - care^l not to wear

     "Don't you like your new dress?" she asked one day

     "^ yes. I really llk. it a lot. I'm savin, it for school... I .epiled

 Sprln,d;S £nheSiAuentfe^ibSater•Grneaden,vl^ ^ cane for me t0 ^ t°'

 ^celcis products, this was reason Sugh^" ..A ter three years of pedd11^

 I had hated the job.  I figured peopScoufdbuv^h'? ^aseat to let me ^it-

 store, and could get It for les«   T ^ ,,n   "v   "t thev "anted at the

 door salesmen that" has nev^r changed   S ^dn??T '""P^ f" door-to-

 women, I could never have stood I?   TO,      hadn't been for three particular

 anticipating my call, with Sr order PrSlSl'1^"1 HB11' "h0 ^ "S^,

 sat me down to a cool drink and a friendly v^t    ,,   ' and LizzY Lee' "h0

 ixvely good humor.  They. lightened S,^^'^^ wright' wlth h"
Whiled w.s^y^fZT^ l^ft90 s'ne^ldTTtr I ws t0 ^-P ^
^ed^t^we^ices o-tea'^^1^^ t^^^da'y"-5
^ a|                      ^^S ^U ^
= ^
-76-


 Venona washed and scrubbed like she actually enjoyed it.  And with some feel-

 ings of guilt, I suspected she was quite a resourceful cook.  But I lulled

 my conscience with the thought that I could get Reita and Alien to sit quiet

 longer than she could.  The balcony  above the front porch  was a favorite

 spot, where we curled up on the mattress in the afternoon shade  while I

 read stories to them.

      Almost everyone in Oak Creek and Springdale danced, that is, everyone

 but me.  The sound of dance music made me forlorn, for I knew Grandma had

 been right.  Already I was a social failure.  Nevertheless, I went to a

 Saturday night dance with my cousins.   I planned to just sit and watch.

 But because I was a new girl in town, all of the boys asked me to dance.

 "I don't know how," was my miserable reply.  I suffered, and wanted to run

 home.  One boy, who had called on me at Aunt Marilla's, asked for a dance

 and I refused.  Angrily he said,"No girl ever refuses me a second time."

 I suffered.

      During the evening a stranger swaggered in.  "The treat's on me, folks,"

 he said,passing a bag of candy to the crowd.

      I remembered a story about a girl who took candy from a stranger, and

 later on she had an illegitimate baby.  I stoutly refused the stranger's

 candy, and everyone ate it but me.

      Occasionally, when my work was through, I walked to Oak Creek to see

 Grandmother.

      "You've got to quit hiking along the highway alone," Uncle Walter

 warned.  "You could be kidnapped by some tourist.  Grandmother would think

 you were with us, and we'd think you were with her, and you could be hund-

 reds of miles away before you were missed."

      He made me feel leery, but not leery enough.  Sunday after church, I
wanted to show Grandmother the dress Kate had given me.  It was a filmy,

 lavender georgette, with rose colored roses, and was trimmed with wide ecru

 lace.  My fat braids were wound in a bun over each ear, and I had a sense of
well-being.  After I had passed the last shade tree in Springdale, the sun
bore down upon me.  A couple  in a Model T car  stopped.

      'Would you like a ride?" the man asked.

     I really wanted to ride, but I knew by their dark glasses  that they
were tourists and could be dangerous.

      "I'll Just^stand on the running board," I said, cautiously stepping on.
If he goes to kidnap me, I'll jump, I thought.  "I want to get off at the
road to the big white house in Oak Creek," I said.

     "Fine," the man replied.

     As I hung on, I realized how easily I could be kidnapped,  when he
approached the takeoff to Grandmother's, I imagined he speeded his motor
To be on the safe side, I jumped, skidding in the gravel.  The man slammed
on the brakes.

     "You little fool!" he shouted.  "Why did you do that?  I was goinq to
take you to your Grandmother's door.  Now get in "
. ^^ s^ K sT^T^Ti^^ £?^.
-77-


 He took me to Grandmother's house, venting his wrath upon me before leav-  •

 ing.  Grandmother and Aunt Emma cleaned my wounds with hot water and soap

 and dug out gravel.  Word got to Uncle Walter and he came after me.  I was

 bandaged and left to do the best I could around the house.  I hurt.  My

 arm throbbed painfully all night and the next day.  By afternoon, dark red

 veins ran from my wrist to my elbow.  The throbbing and pounding was un-

 bearable.  Aunt Marilla's kids had scattered. Uncle Walter was at work

 and I was alone.  Desperately, I walked to Gotfried Ruesch's house.  He was

 sxtting under the shade of his mulberry tree.

      "What are these streaks on my arm?" I asked.

      "Blood poison," he said in alarm.  "Ivan, Rowena, come here," he

 called to his kids.  "Go to the river quick and bring me some fresh

 squaw-bush bark.  Hurry!"

    Laboriously he arose from his chair.  He was a heavy man, and walking

 wasn't easy.  I followed him into his kitchen, where he mixed a concoction

 of boiling water, corn meal, sticky-gum, and what else, I wish I knew.
When the squaw-bush bark was brought, he pounded it to a pulp and added it
to the pasty mixture.  Digging out more little rocks that were embedded in
my festered hand, he spread the poultice on.  It was warm and soothing.
Gradually, the throbbing subsided, and like mercury in a thermometer, the
angry red lines receded and my wound came clean.  I know now that I owe my
life to Gotfried Raesch.  By the time Aunt Marilla came home, I was healed.

     Uncle Walter must have said something to Aunt Marilla about the food
Sorh?.^ \ x TT" saw such a fancy lunch as the first one she P^ed
for him after she got home.  His sandwich was a production of diced meat

  S381"961" P3-ckles' besides the ^are of freshly baked, thickly iced
cake.  My face burned, thinking-of the awkward, identical lunches I had
given him.

      In spite of my feelings of inadequacy, I enjoyed working at Aunt
Marilla's.  She had a player piano and many rolls of music.  One roll I

 especially liked  was "The Fate of Floyd Collins",  because it made such a
lump in my throat.  Floyd was a boy who became lost in a cave in Kentucky,
and was never found.  As we worked the treadles, the music went from roller
to roller, and the words appeared so we could sing along.  Ah, what sweet
sorrow!

     Floyd's fate called to mind the heart rending songs of my childhood.
There seemed to be a satisfaction in grieving as we sang, "Oh don't you re-
member, a long time ago, when two little babes, whose names I don't know
were lost in the woods, one bright summer day," etc.  The babies died in
the woods and the robins covered them with leaves.

     I would swallow and swallow, to get the ache out of my throat when
Grandma or Papa sang,".oh what is this?'the policeman he cried.  'Twas
poor little Joe.  On the ground he had died.  No mother to guide him, in
the grave she lie low.  Cast on the cold street was poor little Joe^"
when they sang about the little girl who tried to get her drunk father out
of the saloon, because poor Benny was dead.  She pleaded, "Come home, come
home, oh Father, dear Father, come home." Also many people died of broken
hearts in those old songs.  Soulfully we sang about the lonesome cowbov whn
came home to find the newly made mound where his broken- headed darSnn wh0 '
neSt  A? the songf "Juanita*" th- Americano died w£h adagger ThL
heart.  At every campfire party, we sang about "the night birl^yLg^the
-78-


 breezes sighing.  Far, oh far, far, away, her brave lies sleeping, while

 Red Wing's weeping, her heart away,"  and about the wail of woe in Fallen

 Leaf's wigwam.  There seemed to be something so exquisite in suffering set

 to music.

      Aunt Marilla had lots of happy music, and lots of the very best, but

 the roll I remember most was about Floyd.

      After Aunt Marilla returned home from the hospital, things became more

 interesting. I was entertained with the exchange of words between her and

 Uncle Walter.  At home, things were never so lively.  Papa always called

 Mama "Sweetheart",  and she silently accepted his adoration and that was all

 there was to it.  I had no doubt but what Uncle Walter and Aunt Marilla

 were just as in love as Papa and Mama, but there always seemed to be some

 sort of conquest going on.

      One morning, Uncle Walter grabbed his lunch bucket, bolted for his

 pickup and barrelled out like he was leaving forever.

      Aunt Marilla said, "I won't be around when he comes home.  I'm leaving."

      Hastily she stirred up a cake, fried some chicken and made a salad,

 packing them in a basket.                                              '

      "We'll just take you and Reet, and go to Mother's and stay.  I'm not

 coming back," she said.                                                 ——

      I wondered why she didn't pack any clothes, but didn't ask.  As she

 drove her car toward Oak Creek, she made it quite clear that she was through

 with Uncle Walter forever.  She was so convincing  that I knew she would be

 iT^ ^   hlm'. Just before she got t0 the l^-off at Grandmother's,

 Uncle Walter came driving down the road from the Park.  He steered his pickup

 over on her side of the road, forcing her to stop, then he eased his front

 bumper up against hers.  Angrily she bit her lips, glaring at him.  He got

 out of the pickup, walking resolutely around to where she sat under the

 steering wheel.  No western movie, and no Ellison White Chautauqua had ever

 had half the drama I was witnessing at this moment.  Uncle Walter's eyes

 He^™ 'y3 f steelf and his mouth was set in a f±rm^ straight line.

 He looked positively romantic.  Aunt Marilla proudly held her head high.

      "Where do you think you're going?" he said in a firm, level voice.

      "To Mother's," she retorted.  "I'm leaving you."

     "Turn that car around, and go right back home," he ordered  then
Jumped into his pickup and backed up, leaving her room to turn.
She sTSh^tabL^ ^ turned the car around, and he followed her home.
bne set the table with her scrumptious food, and the family ate in total
peace.  I knew for sure Aunt Marilla was plum  in love with Uncle^er.

     After I returned home. Uncle Walter came to pay me, but I refused to
take anything.  He left fourteen dollars on the table.  After iFwas ^hed
it was enough to buy a winter coat from Chicago Mail OrderCompany tS Srst
pretty coat I had ever owned -a brown one with a fur coUar0
by siSpin^out^rthrbarn'^             ^ I-ote.:, "we Crated
K:; oSsTSack- doTcame^u^^^    oef ^'-s^e
- .V .e.  I .old him fo^Twa^ he-juTya^f^ne arm ov^me
-79-


  and licked my face. "

  K-, ^iV7" MY blrthday-, celebrat^ it by hiking up the hill with Annie,

  Kate and Mildred.  Kate took her Kodak.  We hiked to the third falls   I

  found two cactus apples and we each ate half ... We went in swimming in

  ^•ecaa1 — • Inthe ^^"g Annie and I went to wish Aunt Ellen a happy

  h^TSndy'pS.^"^ todaY and she was fift^-. We cane ho.e anF

      Hiking with my sisters was a favorite pastime.  My diary continues-

  "Annie brought a can of pineapple home from work, and some vLnna sausages

  I made a Jelly roll and we hiked through greaswood, matchbrush, cactus and*

  Aaparral.  We came to some thimble-berry bushes in the red ^ootSSs aT

  Sos Ta?^ ^ Dustycedar tre€- ^ the way stirred homesick long-

  ings for Kolob.  From Goosberry, we hiked extra miles to get to the road

 ^: r?de" came along and picked us up at Lookoff point- ^ ^l:d "or

 stp^l SS3 riding was the current fad in Hurricane.  A number of barns had

 p..^^^^^^^^^      ^ ^ ^

 down on his own, which was the next best thing to flySg             led

 before had I been invited to ride^he cable  and ?n,f ^     "T* but never

 again, so the folks left me to choo^ what^ t'ho'ugh^ r^.'6 lnvited

 patch^n^onn 7^°^^ I ^led through the fence ^ —— lucerne

 the wire squealing'^ ^ugSn^nois^as^aS^ sa^g up^ down

 I hung on, and Les Ashton ran along Se ground^n^h. ^en mY turn carne'

 through the air.  One of ^he wir^ r.n ^       m'    he tow rope and I soared

 hand.  It hurt.  I tried to w^ggS ?ree ^os't mv Sf l^se' gouging mY

 of it flipped up, leaving me dangling bv^st on. Y T13 ^ the bar-  Qne end

 the top.  I either fell ll^y^^ mindraced f^B? \  Y now' I had reached

 =^ S .T^; ^^TS
hanging upside down, cornlasses d^Sing £om ih^,6 ^^ the ground»
turned black.  The next tim. T ^rf^    g          sky' then the world
r^y^^^v^ f^s- ..very strange-I thou^.
that .ouo»ea, ^ z ^ ^ ^ ^ ^X^0^^

                                   -80-

 open one eye and find Kate holding a mirror in front of me, and laughing.

 My other eye was swollen shut, and my misshapen face was purple and black.

 It didn't cheer me any, to see how ugly I was.  One foot shot pain up my

 leg when I tried to move.  I couldn't see what Kate had to laugh about.

 She didn't even know whether I was going to live or not, because there

 wasn't anyone in town who had fallen as far as I had.

       Kate's face blurred and the world passed away.  For two weeks,! sub-

 merged, then surfaced briefly.  All I remembered, was seeing people take

 shape by my bed and then melt in fog, and seeing that maddening mirror.

       The saddest part of the whole ordeal  was,that every boy had to

 take his cable down, by order of his .parents.  I was filled with humility.

       I recovered from my fall in time to pack peaches.  Hurricane was

 mostly orchards at that time, and peaches were shipped by the tons.  Men

 and boys did the picking and girls did the packing.  If a girl was extra

 good, she could pack and face fast enough to earn five or six dollars a

 day.  Two and a half a day was my speed, and that was good.

       Peaches were dumped by the wagon load onto burlap-topped tables  to

 be sorted and packed.  The fuzz built up and clung like nap on velvet

 "Goofer feathers",  it was called.  Sometimes we packed for fifteen hours a

 day, and were so weary that all night long we dreamed of peaches.  I used

 to dream of sleeping on the packing tables with nothing on but fuzz, while

 fruit inspectors marched endlessly by.

      After the packing shed closed down, our Bee Hive class took a trip to

 Grand Canyon.  This trip filled pages in my diary.  I was so in love with

 life'  I marveled over the ponderosatrees, the little pond that we called

 Jacob's Lake and the ninety-five foot observation tower that I climbed three

 times.  Maggie Petty was our chaperon, and Alma Isom the chauffeur.  Alma

 had a panel truck that screened us in like monkeys in a cage.

      On the first lap of the journey, gas fumes made us all car sick   We
were glad when a tire blew out above Gallager's Dugway, so we could get out

 and lay on the sandrocks among the cedars.  In those days, blowouts were in-

 cidental to every trip.  It took Alma four hours to hike to Pipe Springs
and back to fix the tire.                                             -
Aim. l0?1"9 through w park' we ^P^ ourselves on the outside of the car.
Alma let us ride on the running boards, lounge on the fenders, perch on tne
back end of the truck, and cling like lizzards onto the heavy guagew^re
pan   ^".Just ^^^ t0 be on the outside.  We were tagged cTi^ick-
ers and hiking boots, with red bandannas tied on our heads.
Aim. ^Mildr^ wasone of the g^-ls hanging onto the wire paneling, and when
Alma drove through a narrow cut in the forest, everyone was able to jump Sf
but her.  She was wedged between a tree and the car, with a limb gouging
co'uld^ve SSn3^.3^ Alma- and he let the tn^ r011 ba^  ^
v.-° mef Mldredwas the (3±rl that a1! love stories were written about.
Vicariously I lived her romance with Maurice Judd.  No doubt, it was her "In
^ook,,^     ^ S?SLT^ ^serv1"sistlsn -
?; S^-i^S S^18" for a — ^ S^r^ ^d-

      "Can I marry her?" he asked me.

                                     -81-

      "Not,unless you take us both," I retorted.

      Well, she wasn't quite that pretty to him.

      We slept under four quilts at Grand, and when we were caught in a cloud

  burst, we found cliff dwellings enough to shelter us all.  My closing entry

  on our Bee Hive trip was, "My heart tugged inside as we ate our last meal

  before leaving the forest.  No one could possibly know how much I longed

  for just one more day.  The truck stopped and I climbed the observation

  tower and looked over the forest and said goodbye to it.  I wish I could

  live in a forest."

      More diary notes:

     August 12 - Maurice Judd and Clarence Brooksby came in from Fredonia.

 Maurice is in love with Mildred and our whole family is in love with him.

  If Mildred doesn't want him, I'll take him.  (Mildred wants him!)

     September 10 - Venice and I went to Cedar City with Cliff Spendlove.

  Venice, Clara and I slept together in the hay loft.  We tied our big toes

 to each other's with strips torn from an old shirt.  Clara said it was a

 way of telling our fortune.  The strips were soft, and easy to break.

 Clara said the one who had the shortest string on in the morning, would be

 the first to marry.  If there was one without any string on at all, they

 would be an Old Maid.  When we woke up in the morning, Clara had a short

 strip on her big toe.  Venice slept in the middle.  She had a long strip

 on each toe, and I had none.  That didn't jolt me.  I always figured I'd

 be an Old Maid.

     September 12 - Cliff came back from his peddling trip to Beaver, and

 he brought back a wife!  Viola Murdock.  And she's no older than I am;

 Oh my, but she's a beauty!  Black hair.  Black eyes, and so cute it's'

 easy to see why he kidnapped her!

     September 15 - Hyrum Bradshaw is off hauling wood, and Hortense doesn't

 like to. sleep alone, so Mama sent me out to stay with her.  On my way  I

 met Butch.^ He put his arm around me.  Ever since Grandmother Crawford

 told me about how she kept the boys from being fresh with her, when she was

 young, I had a mind to try it.  This was my first chance.

     "Does your arm hurt?" I asked.

     "No.  Why?"

     "Because it's out of place."

     If Butch had been like the boys in Grandmother's time, he would have

 been embarrassed and dropped his arm.  But he didn't.  He just laughed and

 hugged me harder and put his face against mine.  I kicked his shins until

 he let me go. Come night, when I said my prayers, I prayed that he would

 be decent.  He's a poor, motherless kid and nothing but a tobacco fiend

 He smelled like Bull Durham.

     December 12, 1925 - Today the entire High School went upon the hill and

 spent the day building the "H."  Anthony Isom was High School President

 and engineered the building.  He formed us into rock brigade lines, fannino

 us out from the four points of where the "H" was to be built.  Rocks were "

 SS^the'b^eS "Sch1? and pu^ int0 place by those SSned "o

 It was neat and^f^S.  ^ '•H^was^comn^/^ ^cks became depleted-

 night.  It can be seenfo^ n-l     ^    completed and whitewashed before

 to'be in th.ThSt^T^ng'Sup?6" approachi^ Hu—————  I am glad
*  Not his real name.

                                  -82-

    This was my first year high.  Our cousin, Elva Crawford, lived at our
house and went to school with me.  Tuition was high.  It cost $28.00 to
enter the ninth grade, so I took a janitorial job.

    At Christmas time, Annie and Mildred got boxes of chocolates from their
beaus and bosses.  The biggest box was a five pound one from Charlie Petty.
With all of the homemade candy around, the chocolates remained unopened
in their pretty boxes on the dresser in the front room.  Christmas night,
Kate and I found ourselves alone.  Mama and Papa and the younger kids had
gone to bed and Annie and Mildred were out with Rass and Maurice.

    Mischievously, Kate gravitated to the chocolates.  "I wonder what the
candy in this box tastes like," she mused.

     "I'll bet Annie could tell us."

     "But she's not here.  Look, the ribbon is loose."  She slipped off
the bow as she spoke. "Ah," she inhaled, lifting the lid.  "I know what!
I'll get a paring knife and slice into one piece to see what color it is
inside."  It was pink.

    She closed her eyes in ecstasy as the slice of chocolate melted on
her tongue.  "Raspberry!  Ummmm!"

    Then impishly she sliced into another piece.  "Maple!  I love maple!"
And she popped that into her mouth.

    I was intrigued at what she was doing, but wasn't quite brave enough
to help myself, until she said,"I know what!  We'll dump all of the choc-
olates onto the table and repack them.  There'll be plenty left over for
us."

    The idea of repacking the candy seemed fun, so I helped.  When we
were finished, the boxes looked full, and we had eaten what we wanted.
The next day we confessed to Annie and Mildred what we had done, and they
actually seemed pleased at our cleverness.

                                CHAPTER 15

                               Wedding Bells

                                   (1926)

     We knew that eventually our ranks would be broken, but it was good
being one of six sisters who were always home for Christmas.  Five of us
could wear the same size of shoes and dresses.  People, meeting any one of
us on the street would say, "Hello Kate," or "Hello Mildred," or any one
of our six names.

     Since Annie started working for Charlie Petty, we had anticipated her
coming home each evening,  she and I had packed many a lunch and hiked
miles together.  She had been good to the family too, making payments on
the washing machine, cream separator, and sewing machine, and bringing
home luxuries the family had never been able to afford.  Conscientiously
she had managed to add a little at a time to her trousseau too.

      When her wedding day was finally set, she bought a wonderfully, beau-

 tiful wedding dress.  On the llth of June, she and Rass were married ir the

 Salt Lake Temple,and Cedar City became her new home.

                                    -83-

       Working in the Parks in the summer-time  serving bus loads of tour-

  ists • made Kate sparkle in my eyes.  The girls in the Parks serenaded

  the tourists as the busses arrived, and whenever Kate came home for a

  short visit, she sang for us her Grand Canyon songs.  She enjoyed her job.

       During one of Mildred's interludes at home. Mama and Papa took Edith,

  LaPriel and the boys to Oakcreek to spend a week with Grandmother and

  Aunt Emma.  Mildred and I were left to milk the cows and feed the pig.

  Never before had we had the whole place to ourselves.  To us, it was a

  vacation.  Mildred made a layer cake with cream filling and icing, and

  we ate cake everyday.  Deciding to transform the place, we housecleaned

  from the upstairs to the cellar.  Instead of being work, it was fun

  and the house looked beautiful.  We could not have had a happier vacation.

       After the family returned, a blustering wind broke a limb in the

  mulberry tree.  Willie decided to chop out the broken limb.  Eiton Stout

  carried the axe and Stirling Isom came along. Clinton started up the tree

  ahead of them.  When Willie demanded that he come down, he refused.

       "Shall I chop his toe off?" Eiton asked.

       "Yaw," Willie replied.

       Eiton only meant to scare Clinton, when he swung the axe, but in-

  stead, he chopped right through his big toe.  Horrified, Eiton dropped the

  axe and he and Stirling streaked for home.  Willie, white as a ghost,

  helped his howling, bleeding brother into the kitchen.  Mama grabbed Clin-

  ton, whose toe was still hanging  by the skin, and sat him in a chair,

  ^e S   S f^l^n a dead faint upon the floor- After cleaning Clinton's

  foot, Mama bound the toe in place, where it healed, but it still has a hump

  of a scar across the top of it to this day.

    ^  Each September brought a particular dawn when we were awakened by the

  clinking of chains and the clopping of horses, as a caravan of wagons

  SS^^ ! Hurricane hiu- ^" was the day the winter's wood was

  gathered to heat the school and the church building.  At night, after the

  cedar and pine wood was piled high behind the schoolhouse, the town's

  folks celebrated with a Wood Hauler's Dance.  In spite of the fact that I

 ^L ?T to,dance'there ^ still a deep longing within me. I was

  gla •    ^ ^T  t0 help serve- I loved the fee1 of being dressed in voile

 and in patent leather slippers.  (Childhood days of only one pair S shoe^

 mark's^ loved1 S^een" and cocoaT guests ma- ——————g^063

  .,     -That  winter  I  fcook  a  lea^  Part  in  the. school  play  "The Burglar."    m

 it, I had to scream.  I'd never really screamed since the lightning struck

 me.  Now, when I tried, it wasn't clear, beautiful and pierce but

 mostly a squawk.  I wanted to scream pretty, so after the eveninc milkinq

 was done, and the hay pitched into the manger, I stayed up in the barntl

 dered   Two^; T^ "^ Isom calne running t0 see wh0 was ^9 "^--

 dered.  Two days before the performance, I became hoarse.

 voice!'01" n0'" I moaned)  "my first rea1 part in a pla^ and I'"1 10^ my

     Anxiously, I gargled with salt, listfirine, lemon juice, pepper-sauce,
soda and aspirin —with anything that anyone suggested.  I tried so many
remedies that I became sick.  The night of the play, I went on stage, forc-
ing my voice to the limit.  I squeaked, instead of screamed.  After the

                                  -84-
final curtain, members of the cast patted my back sympathetically.  My head

 throbbed and I went home to bed.  For the next two weeks I couldn't speak.
I learned what it was to die -trying.

                                  CHAPTER 16

                              More Wedding Bells

                                    (1927)

     One evening as the family sat at the supper table, Papa noticed Clin-
ton contentedly munching on a slice of cheese.

      "dint," he scolded, "you can't eat your cheese alone!  Eat some bread
with it."

     Instantly tears welled up in Clinton's eyes.  "I already ate two
slices of bread with nothing on them, so I could eat my cheese alone."

      "All right," Papa chuckled, and Clinton was permitted to revel in his
luxury.

     Mildred worked for Fosters in Cedar, and early in March I received a
package from her.  Opening it, I beheld a breath-taking creation of pale
green and apricot colored georgette.  A note read, "I thought you might be
going to the Junior From."

     As I lifted the dress from the package, its delicate filminess gave me
the sensation of petals blowing in the breeze.  The dress was trimmed with
dainty, fluted ruffles.  It had a nipped in waist and a flouncy, gathered
skirt.

     "Oh Mildred, Mildred," I whispered.  "This dress must have cost you
two weeks of your skimpy salary."

     "How can I ever thank you? The dress tickles me to pieces," I wrote.

     Elmer Matheson, Pass's brother, replied for her.  "If the dress tickles
you so much, take the feathers out of it."

     I wore the dress to the first Junior From ever held at Hurricane High.
The Junior Class had been added to the school just one year before.  The
class members had spent weeks making paper flowers to decorate the arches
and trellises for the "Japanese Gardens",  the theme of the Prom.  Beyond
all doubt, nothing so elegant had ever been put on in Hurricane before.
The hall was so beautiful, and I felt so lovely in my Proro Dress, it never
occurred to me to worry about the dance.  By now, I had acquired a cluster
of non-dancing friends, and we mingled happily among the throngs who had
come to enjoy the decorations and the floor show.

     Another great event in the family was Kate's graduation from the B.A.C.
She came home with her Teaching Certificate, and a contract to teach school
in Summit the next fall, in Iron County.

     On May 20th, Charles A. Lindberg flew across the Atlantic, from New
York to Paris, in his aeroplane, the "Spirit of St. Louis".   This was the
flrst!non-stoP flight ever to be made across the ocean.  He flew 3,600 miles
in 33o hours.  His pictures were splashed in every newspaper and he became

                                   -85-

 a world hero.  Lindberg was single and handsome, and girls almost swooned at

 the mention of his name.  Song writers didn't waste a moment in putting to

 music this big event.  The hit song of the day was about the "Lone Eagle."

                                 Chorus:

                Lindberg, oh what a wonder boy is he.

                Lindberg, his name will live through history.

                Over the ocean he flew all alone,

                Gambling with fate, and with dangers unknown.

                Others may make a trip across the sea,

                Upon some future day,

                But take your hats off to plucky,-lucky Lindberg,

                The Eagle of the USA.

      Mildred suddenly became a major family concern,  she had worked in so

 many different places, and got attention from so many different people

 that misunderstandings arose, and she broke off her engagement to Maurice

 She became engaged to a man who was much older than she was, and a sad  sad

 substitute for that darling, sweet Maurice.  The family  grieved for we

 knew Mildred was eating her heart out.  She cried over every little thine

 and became a jumpy, nervous wreck.

      One week end, a letter came from Maurice,and Mildred ran to her room

 to ^ad tt'  As Kate and I went up the stair^^ Mildred ran past us and out

 the kitchen door, weeping.  Maurice's open letter lay on the floor at the

 head of the stairs.  I picked it up, and together Kate and I read it, then

 we went into our room where we both wept.  The letter was a heartrending

 plea for Mildred to do the thing that would bring her the greatest happi-

 ness.  Each word was one of stabbing pain.

      The family's anxiety, and Maurice's unselfish surrender brought

 Mildred to her senses and she and Maurice were married on the fourteenth of

 June, in the St. George Temple,                                    "^eerrcn or

      Oh,happy,^happy Wedding Day, even if sister Judd (Maurice's mother)

 h^3? a ^ lr0? ^ Mauricels b^ new suit and bum a flat-iron shaped

 hole clear through the sleeve.  Maurice was cooler in his shirt sleeves at

 Sw^TT10^ that.ni^ht• Ifc was c^tomary for brides to wear their going

 away^clothes at their reception.  Mildred's dress was a lovely pink, fiS-

     Maurice had a younger brother Orval, who occasionally dated me  While
he worked on Klabab Mountain, logging for a lumber company, he bought a new
Ford Coupe  shiny and black.  Orval was a sporty chap who wore his hat a^T
rakish angle and had a fetching grin.  When he drove up in^S Coupe an?
announced that he had come to give me a driving lesson^ I was e^SSd   I
slid under the wheel and he explained the gears, gas feed and brSe? and
cautioned me that a car must go slow for the first five-hundredm^Ss!  We
^- ? T twoblocks from our Pl^e to Frank Ashton.s corner, Orval keep-
Then T\^ ^n T ? T t0 steady ifc unti1 after we had made ^ turn.
Then I held the wheel alone.  The car wobbled, making crazy tracks in the
dust of main street.  Giddy with pride, I noted the loafers, percned iSe
starlings on the iron rail in front of John Pettv's ooolh^iT?  • e
S^h^ ^S^- ^^ 31 ?1^ os; lf =-
^ X .01 it unae. cont.,1.  ^he^T^ ^T^: ^oS^T17'

                                   -86-

 front of Walter Stout's Garage.  I wanted everybody to see me drive, so I

 honked the hom.  Then the car really swerved, landing in the ditch.  Orval,

 with the help of the amused onlookers, lifted it out.  He didn't chastise me,

 but patiently told me what not to do, especially not to turn comers at

 40 MPH, like I did at Frank Ashton's comer on the way back home.  Thus ended

 my first driving lesson.

      When Mary and Walter Stout went away for a week's vacation, they asked

 me to come each evening and stay over-night with their children.  Their

 oldest girl. Wealthy, was Edith's age, but they felt better having someone

 older there at nights.  Venitta was the girl next younger, and there was a

 pass el of little brothers. Every one of the Stout children were exception-

 ally good looking --fair skin, blue eyes, blonde, with ready smiles that

 showed their dimples.  They gathered around me each evening with happy

 chatter, and went all-out to be good to me.  At breakfast and suppertime

 they eagerly urged me to eat more.  Their approach tickled me.  "If you

 don't eat it, we'll just have to give it to the pigs," they would say.

     Walter Stout owned the first radio in Hurricane.  Two years earlier,

 a group of us went from Mutual to his home  on a summer evening, and

 listened while he turned some buttons in the maize of tubes and wires spread

 over a table.  Through the static, he brought in some distant music, which

 was a miracle.

      On August 14, Mama and Papa became Grandma and Grandpa, and the rest
of us became Aunts and Uncles.  Annie's and Rass's baby boy, Keith, was born.

 It was an exciting day when Annie and Rass brought the little bundle to see
us.  We clustered around Annie when she pulled the fluffy blue blanket bade

 from his funny little face.  We laughed heartily when the baby squinted
at us, then stuck out his lips like he was trying to say,"You."  I think he
was trying to ask^"You all my relatives, huh?"

     That fall. Hurricane High bought thirty typewriters.  They only had
four the year before  for their first type class.  Since no certified
teacher was to be had, they hired Bradshaw Chevrolet's secretary, Laura
Lund.  She was almost as young as her pupils, and so anxious to make good,
that she worked hard with each individual student,- patiently drilling day
after day.  By Christmas, most of the class had their thirty-word certifi-
cates.  By spring, many were doing sixty words-a-minute,and a few were
doing seventy.  Laura was cute and conscientious, and won the heart of every
student.                                                                     "

     The school also added Seminary to their curriculum that fall, with
seventy-five students enrolled in Old Testament History.  Jesse Rich was the
instructor and classes were held upstairs in the Sandberg Building.  Mr.
Rich was badly crippled with arthritis, and came to Hurricane to be near
the Hot Springs, where he could soak every day.  He was the city attorney
for Logan, and hired me to type his legal papers.  He allowed no erasures,
and paid me $1.00 a page.  The training was great.  I also didlTis black-
board work in Seminary.

     Mr. Rich became dear to every student and they absorbed the Old Test-
ament eagerly.  When the question came up, "Why did Jacob seemingly use
30 "^ trlcks t0 get the best of h^ father-in-law?" or, "Why w2.David
pemotted to be a prophet, when he had committed such a serious ^.ime-
Mr. Rxch patently renanded the class that the Lord uses the besFmSerial

                                      -87-
he has.  This point was repeatedly emphasized, whenever anyone was prone to
criticise.

     When Mr. Rich came to Hurricane, he hobbled with a cane in each hand.
After nine months in Southern Utah's climate, soaking daily in the Hot
Springs, he had discarded both canes.

     Seminary was to the school  what dessert is to a meal, and Chorus,
under Karl Larsen, was like cream on the dessert.  Almost all of the
students were enrolled in both.

                                  CHAPTER 17

                               Daughter, Beware!

                                    (1928)

      Papa counseled us more often than Mama did, simply because he was

 usually there, especially in the mornings and evenings, and Mama was

 always busy.  Since Sam Pollock had repeatedly warned about the devil pay-

 ing our parents off in sons-in-laws. Papa did his part to see that the

 devil had nothing to do with it.  He didn't take my dating with Orval Judd

 seriously, because Orval was Maurice's brother, and more like a relative.

 But when other dates came on the scene, I was lectured about the dangers

 of going with strangers.

      I tolerated the lectures  and Papa's anxious counseling, realizing

 I was also included in his prayers.  It was Papa who always called to us

 from his bed upstairs  when we came in at nights.  No matter how late we

 were, he never slept until we were safely home.

      One of my girl friends worked at the Bradshaw Hotel, and on Sunday

 evenings, when she was off-duty, our gang collected there.  At the Hotel,

 we naturally met strangers.

      One evening, three of the hotel guests invited three of us to go for

 a little spin.  I had a queer feeling as I got in the front seat of the car

 with the driver.  The other two couples took the back seat.  Because I

 didn't want to be a "wet blanket" I ignored the prompting to not go. I

 knew Papa would never approve of the stranger at my side.

      For awhile, we cruised about town.  Pilled with apprehension, I sat

 speechless, and the other girls seemed tongue-tied too.  The driver slowly

 turned down "lover's lane",  a road leading into a thick grove of fig trees,

 and parked.  I was scared.

      When he slid toward me, I quickly opened the car door and said, "Shall

 we walk?"

      He was agreeable, and we strolled out from the dark cover of the trees

 and down the lane.  Oh,how I wanted the Lord's protection, but I felt em-

 barrassed to ask him.  But in the starlight, opportunity for escape loomed

 before me.  It was the gate to my cousins   Burr and Evadna Bradshaw's

 place.

      '"//ell,  it has been nice knowing you," I said, "and now I'll say good-

 night.  Thanks for walking me home."

       Flabbergasted, he said, "This isn't your house is it?"

                                  -88-

      "Sure," I fibbed.

      "Well, I'll be - - .  Say, you can't go in now.  We just got together."

      "Sorry, but I've got to go in.  The folks will wonder what happened to
me."

      "Goodnight then."  He reached for me, but I sped up the walk.

     The house was dark, but I knew I had to go in, so I opened the door
and stepped inside.  Peering through the screen, I watched as he reluctantly
started back up the lane.  I was afraid my pounding heart and shaking frame
would wake Burr and Evadna.

     Would that man ever get far enough away so I could slip back outside?
At last, I could see him no more.  Flattening myself against the wall, I
slid out the screen door and along the porch to the rear of the house.  I
banged into an old wash tub in the back yard, which almost gave me a heart
attack.  Crouching, I listened, but could hear no one coming.  I knew I
had to make time, because when the man got back to the car, he would learn
that I had pulled a fast one on him, and the others would come looking for
me.

     Running through the trees, I scratched myself on the branches.  When I
came to the big ditch, half the canal, it seemed, was tumbling through its
rocky banks.  I would be seen if I crossed the foot bridge, so I stepped
gingerly from rock to rock.  The beam of a spot light bobbed up and down
through the orchard.  Slipping, I stumbled.  Drenched to my knees, I
crouched behind a clump of poplar saplings on the bank, just as the car
turned its beam on the spot where I had been.  I huddled, panting, as the
spot light lingered on the saplings, but the thick clump concealed me, and
they went on by.

     On reaching the street, I ran like a deer.  Now the car was coming
back toward me.  Winded and beat, I dropped to the ground and rolled under
a barbed wire fence into the grass.  The spot light criss-crossed the road,
playing along the fence and lingering on every bush.  Secure in the grass,
I could get my breath.  Back and forth they went, searching the grass where
I lay.  Knowing I couldn't be far away, they persisted.  A bent, dry grass-
head gouged my ear, but I didn't dare move.  Insects crawled on me, still.,
I lay motionless.  At last, the car turned the corner and took off in an-
other direction.  They must have supposed I had taken another way home.

     I crawled from under the fence, and my feet flew.  I just got to Ether
Wood's corner when I saw them coming again.  Our house was kitty-corner
through the block, so I darted through Wood's gate, around their house and
through the trees.  The spot light played up and down the sidewalk.

     I cut through Uncle Marion Stout's corral.  The horses snorted and
a big red bull came toward me.  Caught between a maize of fences and that
rumbling bull was more frightening even  than the spot light.  Terrified, I
scrambled through, and at last was on home soil.  Panting, I sped up the
pathway from the barn, and through the kitchen door.

     From upstairs. Papa called,"Is that you Alice?"

     "Yes," I answered gratefully.

     "This is more like it," he said."I'm glad you're getting home early."

                                  -89-

      The spot light played on the front of the house, and I knew in that

 moment how Peter Rabbit felt  when he stumbled gratefully into the rabbit

 hole after the farmer had chased him.

      This episode livened up the party for the others, for the "fox chase"

 definitely beat parking.  My friends realized the folly of our going for

 a spin in the first place.

      Annie and Rass ran the Flatnose Ranch in Nevada for Uncle John

 Hopkins.  Kate and I took the train from Cedar to Lund, where Rass met us

 This was my first train ride.  Rass, Annie,and little baby Keith, dressed*

 in his bib overalls and big straw hat, took us in their rattling pickup

 sight seeing.  Kate and I sat in the back and sang, and raised sun blisters

 on our noses as we jounced along.  We visited igloo.shaped lime kilns,

 mining towns, ranchers and Mexicans.

      Back at the ranch  was an out-door shower made of a barrel  mounted

 on a platform.  We carried water from the creek, and climbing the ladder

 poured it into the barrel.  Standing beneath it in our bathing suits, we'

 turned on the shower.  We had to soap and scrub fast to get clean before

 the water was all gone.

     At the head of the alfalfa field  was a reservoir of warm water. Kate

 was a good swimmer, but that dark, mossy water scared me.  As I walked

 gingerly into the edge of it, fluffy mud swirled about my feet and the icky

 stuff oozed between my toes.  I felt like the water was inhabitated by

 SS   ^ ' ^"^-^led creatures tangled in the long strings of water

 ^ M i r^   slt on the bank and watch the overhanging branches of

 the black willow  dip and dimple the water.

     With notebook and pencil, I leaned against the tree and scribbled my

 random thoughts.  Mama had requested that I keep a diary during my seven^

 teenth year -and that year was almost over.  She said to keep it for a

 birthday gift to my oldest daughter when she turned seventeen. »

 at FlIS"017 Ireca11 the ess^^ of "'Y scribbling under the willow tree

 at Flatnose.  Seventeen is on the edge of some great thing.  At seventeen

 the grass is taller, the moon bigger, and the world glides in a grander
sweep   Seventeen is melodramatic, comic and frivolous, and some o^ne

 creepiest boys look like heroes!
4-T.     ,on.Au^ust  26'   '1928^   the  Hurricane  Ward  was  divided  into  the  North  and
the South.  Frank Johnson was put in as our new bishop (ofkh~ ^^    ^
Ether Wood was put in as Sunday School Super?n?enden?  and ^ S^T?'
be Sunday School Secretary, wi^h Freda P.Ser as my assLtanF SL was
my ^rsj, church calling.  How happy I was to be considered worthy;
County^cho^^^osed ^^^^?^^ ^^
^S Sy^^^^^^    :en£r east
year in High School.  Anthony Isom had the job of keeping the rest of thp
^e^rS^ rS^ToAnSn^ so-d^er-dH0^^
chips behind the school house where liSL^H   ?  tt   Y' I Leveled for
•nd s^nos.and the ^ ^ 1o,sSU\TbS2 ^ T^?^^
' S^d^; ou^S'o^StS^"","'"1- "- -st ""een.

  am sorry I did.             y    ^timental feelings, I burned it.  Now I

                                 -90-
woodpile.  I tried to make myself small and inconspicuous.  Picking up chips
was humiliating to me.  If I had it to do over, I think I would skip and
sing as I toted the black coal scuttle after kindlings.  I took no joy in
pushing the heavy broom over the splintering, oiled wood floor, nor in
dusting the shelves and tables with the waxy  rags that should have been
burned.  Attitude makes the difference between Heaven and Hell.  My attitude
made this job Hades, especially on the dreadful December day when Hurricane
shivered in a sixty-mile gale.

     I struck half a box of matches that morning, trying to get the fire
started.  I had only slick magazine pages and damp chips.  My teeth chat-
tered and my fingers were numb by the time the fire took hold.  The room
was bitter cold, so as the fire flamed up, I fed it more and more wood and
coal, until the pot-bellied stove glowed red.

     Then  the twenty-foot stove-pipe collapsed across the sewing tables
and over the book shelves.  The stove was located on the opposite side of
the room from the flue, so more heat would be given off by the long, black
pipe wired to the ceiling.  Generations of soot, which had collected in
the pipe, billowed into the room, blinding and suffocating me.  Flames and
smoke shot up from the roaring, red hot stove.  Anthony, who was working in
the next room, came running.  I was both angry and terrified.  Through the
choking, black confusion, he remained calm.  Summoning help from the
street, he put out the fire, then cleaned up the pipes, anchoring them
back in place.  We had no vacuum, and the feathery soot swirled like a
flurry of mischievous spirits in front of my broom.  For days, whisps of
soot puffed out to plague me  from between the books on the library shelves,
until I had been able to deep clean every crevice. Sewing classes were sus-
pended for one day.

     Our sewing teacher, deone Smith, dispelled the gloom of winter in
the sewing room, by ushering in Spring in December.  She had her students
start on their spring dresses.  The room became cheerful with voiles,
chiffons and georgette in rainbow colors,  deone was the beautiful daugh-
ter of the Church Patriarch, Hyrum Smith.  We were honored to have her as
a teacher, and even more honored when she married Alma Isom from Hurricane.

     Stella Willis, the world's champion typist, presented a lyceum assem-
bly at Hurricane.  She could carry on a normal conversation,and type one-
hundred and twenty-five words a minute  accurately, at the same time.  I
was dumfounded when she called me to the stage to give me a concentration
test.  Dazed, I sat down to the spanking new Underwood, with my copy
material before me.  At the signal to start, the typewriter purred.  It was
a good machine.  As the questions were fired at me, I managed to briefly
say "sure",  "yes",  "no",  "of course", and "I don't know".  Mss Willis
checked my finished sheet and announced that I had accurately typed ninety
words a minute.  The assembly applauded.  I was glad to get off the staoe
and melt in with the crowd.  I felt certain Miss Willis had exaggerated"mv
ability.

     Our first year type teacher, Laura Lund, had married the elementary
music teacher, Elvis Bird Terry.  June Bunker was the second year teacher.
She took a group of us to Cedar to the High School Days at the BAC   There
I won a typing scholarship.  At the same time, Mrs. Ruesch, our English

 SIT-8 S^-^r^^^ ^o^s; r^:?-
? ^e^^-sr^^ ^^r^ni ± ^Se"
H= ».s young and attractive. Not long after th.^, he dlld of a^dden^Sness.

                                  -91-

                               CHAPTER 18

                                 College

                                  (1929 )

     One day, after the sewing room was cleaned, I sauntered home with my
arm load of school books.  The afternoon sun was warm and the air smelled
of spring.  Although it was still February, the apricots were in bloom.
Papa was anxiously waiting  as I came into the house.

      "Emil Graff wants to talk to you," he said.

     Afraid to hope, I hurried to the store, where Mr. Graff sat me down
in the shoe room.

      "How would you like to clerk a few hours after school each day?" he
asked.

     How would I like!  How would I like to not pick up chips anymore?
How would I like to not be a janitor anymore?  How would I like to have
the moon?  All of the shoe boxes on the shelves looked friendly.

      "I would love it," I replied.

     Briefly he explained store policy and wages then said, "Be prepared
to start work on the first of March."

     My feet scarcely touched ground as I flew home.  Excitedly I burst
through the door.  "I'm going to clerk in the store," I announced.  Mama
smiled and Papa blinked.

     How much of what happened next was coincidence, or how much was maneu-
vered, I wasn't certain, but the first salesman that showed up in the store
after I started clerking, was from a correspondence school.  It just happen-
ed that he had already visited Mr. Moody at the High School, and had been to
see Papa.  Well, he sold me a course in shorthand and business correspond-
ence, along with a beloved Underwood Typewriter (rebuilt).   Now  I could
clerk all afternoon., and go to school only one-half a day.  At nights I
studied.  Papa dictated shorthand and timed speed tests, and my completed
lessons began to fly in the mail to Chicago.  The corrected ones, along
with my grades, were returned to Milton Moody, the High School Principal.

     One day, Mr. Moody called me into his office.  "You have been chosen
to be the Valedictorian at the graduation exercises.  We also need your
picture for the Year Book."  Year book pictures were taken the day we were
at the B.A.C., so we missed out.

     To make my senior picture special, I got my first beauty parlor appoint-
ment for a marcel    Most of the girls had their hair "bobbed off".  Cut,
that is.  Papa wouldn't hear of such a thing.  My hair was long, done up'in
braids, and wound around my ears.

     "Be not the first the new to try, nor yet the last to lay the old
aside," Papa often recited, then he would add, "A woman's hair is her crown
of glory, and it can't be, if it is cut."
^ r^ the help of.Isaiah» he ke^ us in line by quoting, "Therefore,
the Lord will smite with a scab, the crown of the head of the daughters of
Zion         Instead of sweet smell there shall be stink .... and instead
brJ? ^- air' baldness-" Each "^ht as I tumbled into bed, w£n my
braids falling across my pillow, I'd think, "Well, at least I still have

                                  -92-
my crown of glory."  I didn't want to be one of the wanton creatures that
fulfilled Isaiah's prophecy.  Still, Papa failed to notice that we were the
"last to lay the old aside".

     My friends harangued me, and now that I was clerking, customers tor-
mented me constantly with the question,"When are you going to cut your
hair?"  Like water dripping on a rock, it was wearing me down.

     As I sat in the beauty parlor chair. Hazel Langston took one fat braid
in her hand and asked,"How would you like to have your hair cut, Alice?"

     Her assistant, Felma Webb, grabbed the other braid.  "Oh Alice, please
let us cut your hair."

     I didn't believe they were serious.  Those braids had been a part of
me for eighteen years.  Jokingly I said, "Go ahead."

     With heavy shears. Hazel whacked off a braid, dangling it before me.
A sickening fear swept through me.  Gleeyfully she asked, "Do you still
want your hair cut?"

"Sure," I gulped.  What else could I say?


      Never were two beauty operators more enthusiastic than Hazel and Felma

 as they worked on me together.  They had so much fun  they should have paid

 me, instead of me paying them.  When the cutting and marcelling was done,

 they held a mirror in front of me.  What a doll!  I felt self-conscious

 looking so cute.  But I didn't dare go home for dinner.  I just skipped it

 and went to work instead.  All afternoon I was heaped with compliments.  B^

 quitting time, I felt like a blue-ribbon exhibit.

     The news ran ahead of me.  As I opened our front door, even before

 Papa looked at me, he exclaimed in disgust, "You've made a mess of yourself "

 Nothing more was said.  Days later, I heard him confess to Joe Englestead
that cut hair was neater than long.
-...MY g^^10" dress was a pink, fluttery thing that sparkled with rhine-
stones.   it gave me composure.  The thoughts for my valedictorian address
were triggered by a couple of poems.  The first one was "Opportunity"
by John James Ingalls:                                             -

        Master of human destinies am I.  Fame, love and fortune

             on my footsteps wait,

        And fields I walk; I penetrate cities, deserts and seas remote

        And, passing by hovel, and mart, and palace, soon or late

        I knock unbidden, once at every gate!                     '

        If sleeping wake  -  if feasting, rise before I turn away.

        It is the hour of fate,

        And they who follow me reach every state Mortals desire

        And conquer every foe save death;

        But those who doubt or hesitate, condemned to failure

             penury and woe,                                 '

        Seek me in vain, and uselessly implore -

        I answer not, and I return no more.
^e^^^a^'.,^^ ^—r ^ever sleep-
philosophy, I wholeheartedly accepSa.      '  Y        B- Malone-  His

                                   -93-

             They do me wrong who say I come no more

             When once I knock and fail to find you in.

             For every day, I stand outside your door,

             And bid you wake, and rise to fight and win.

             Wail not for precious chances passed away,

             Weep not for golden ages on the wane;

             Each night I burn the records of the day;

             At sunrise, every soul is born again.

             Laugh like a boy at splendors that have sped;

             To vanished joys be blind and deaf and dumb;

             My judgments seal the dead past with its dead;

             But never bind a moment yet to come.

             Though deep in mire, wring not your hands.

             I lend my arm to all who say "I can",

             No shame faced outcast ever sank so deep

             But he might rise and be again a man.

             Dost thou behold thy lost youth all aghast?

             Dost reel from righteous retribution's blow?

             Then turn from blotted archives of the past

             And find the future's pages white as snow.

             Art thou a mourner'?  Rouse thee from thy spell!

             Art thou a sinner?  Sins may be forgiven.

             Each morning gives thee wings to flee from hell,

             Each night a star to guide thy feet to Heaven.

      I felt the exhilaration of weaving my thoughts around those of the

 great masters.  I was a shining star with all eyes upon me.  It was too
bad I couldn't have stayed at the podium.  But, like a meteorite crashing

 into the forest, I came down onto the floor where benches had been slid
back for the dance.

     Men from the Pine Creek road camp crowded the dance floor.  The Zion

 tunnel was under construction at this time.  Normally, every dance had its
row of wallflowers, but not so this night.  Every girl was popular.  I was
trapped.  One stranger after another took me onto the floor.  The crowd was
my only salvation, because if I got out of step, it could be because someone
else bumped into me.

     That night, I realized that other things in life were as important as
getting "A's" in school.  I felt like a grub, and longed to be a butterfly.

     Mama and Papa weren't at the graduation exercises.  They never went
out at nights.  But in some quiet way, they managed to know what was goinq
on.  When I came home from work  the day after graduation, I noticed the
pack of cards that my talk had been written on  sticking out of Papa's shirt
pOOCGt •

     "What are you doing with those?" I asked.
bank ^SenaSr'HSs^^o'reS.^ pride and grinned-  t!1 took them t0 the
Z. ^adnTt^^ ^.^woSdn.-hav^rDav;^^1—————

                                    -94-

     With school out, I clerked full time.  The "self-service" system
didn't exist.  Customers asked for each item they wanted, and clerks
s'curried about the store to pick them up.  It was time consuming.  I soon
learned why the clerks detested certain customers.  The only way to keep
from detesting them myself  was to make a project of them.  Whenever the un-
desirable, the disagreeable and the ignorant customer came through the
door, I stepped from behind the counter as though tickled to see them.
Amazing!  I discovered that even the grumpiest people were really quite
humorous.

     Once in awhile, my motives weren't rightly understood, and it brought
the wrong kind of company to our home, and some angry lectures from Papa.
He worried because I was gullible, naive, and too trusting.

     For example; a certain road camp guy hung around the store too much,
and no one liked him. He \-ias repugnant to me, but I determined to give him
the "glad to see you" routine to see if it worked.  It worked.  Like a
boomerang!  He came to our house one night, just after we had finished
supper.

      "My name is George," he said, shaking Papa's hand.

      "My name is George too.  Isom, that is.  Who are you?"

      "George Wickey, and I'm a member of the Church."

      "What Church?"

      "Baptist."

      "Doesn't mean a thing to me."

      "Mind if I sit?"

      "Don't mind if you do."

      "Your daughter Alice  is a nice girl."

      "Yes.  Alice is a nice girl."

     George and George sat and visited.  They talked about the progress of
the Zion tunnel and whether it was going to be a long, hot summer or not.

 (The summer was getting quite stuffy at this point.)

      "Your daughter Alice  is a nice girl," George Wickey repeated.

      "Yes, Alice is a nice girl," Papa agreed.

      "I came to ask if I could take her to the dance tonight."

      "I don't like my daughter out in a car with a stranger."

      "I'm walking.  My friend will pick me up after the dance."

      "Well, you've been gentleman enough to ask my consent.  I'll expect you
to be a gentleman and treat her right and get her home early."

     Since I'd started this whole thing  of being nice to Wickey, I might as
well swallow this bitter pill and go with him.  I went to my room and put on
my pink organdy.  At least he should be safe on foot.  Papa's final admon-
ition followed us as we walked out the door.

                                     -95-

      Well, I thought, if we're going to the dance, we're going as fast as
our feet can trot.  I had no notion to linger under the stars with George.

      "What's your hurry?" he asked.

      'We're late.  Can't you hear the music?"

      "Come on.  At least  we can hold hands."  Clutching one of mine, he
slowed me down.

      Just before we got to the old shoe shop, he grabbed me in his arms.
When I resisted, he backed me up against Will Ruesch's fence, breathing
on my neck.  "Are you a gold digger?" he asked.

      "Do you mean someone who goes prospecting out in the hills?" I asked,
pushing him away.

      "No.  It's a girl who gives a guy something for money," he said,
hugging me.

      "No I'm not!" I struggled to get away.  He tried to kiss me.  I'd as
soon kiss a toad.  Breaking loose, I ran.  There were lights and people
outside the school house, so I was safe.  Once inside, I squeezed through
the crowd and hid.  Wickey pushed through, craning his neck looking for
me.  As he edged in, I edged out.

      Overhearing a neighbor say, "Should we run home and check on the kids?"
I asked, "Can I go with you?"

      "Sure thing," was the reply.

      I was home earlier than expected, but Mama and Papa were as relieved
as I.

      "I was wrong to let you go," Papa admitted, "but there's one thing I
wish you would remember.  You can't be friendly to everyone.  Evil men will
take advantage of you."  He had said this to me a hundred times before.
His message was beginning to sink in.

      Most of the customers in the store  during the morning hours  were
women bringing in their butter and eggs.  We paid for these in store
coupons.  Coupons were considered "women's money", because she was the one
who tended the chickens and who churned the butter.  An egg was as good as
cash.  An egg was a handsome reward to a child for getting his work done.
Little kids came to the store daily, exchanging their one egg for a couple
of sticks of candy.

     In our town, everybody knew everybody else, and poked fun at each
other's idiosyncrasies.  One family in particular  was noted for their
tight-hidedness.  Of the man it was said  that he had just got his horses
used to not eating, when they up and died, and that he put green goggles
on his cows  so they'd think straw was hay.  And each morning, he gave his
kids a nickel if they'd drink a quart of water before breakfast, and then
charge them a nickel for their dinner.  When he took his wife out for an
automobile ride, she had to lean forward to save gas, and the family had
to jump the fence, to save the gate hinges.  The fact is, they were very
good people  and everyone liked them, but the man was more frugal than
normal.

                                   -96-

      Qn his wife's birthday, he came to the store with a fist full of her

 egg money.  "Shoot," he said, "I've got to get Mariah^a presant.  I want

 to see your enamelware ."

      Enamelware  consisted of cheap metal pots, pans and dishes, glazed

 with a gray, blue or white porcelain-like finish  that chipped like glass.

 The chipped places rusted.  Enamel dishes were used only at the sheep herd,

 in ranch houses, and for camping out, but not at the dinner table at home.

      "I'll take six plates and six cups.  Mariah is going to be mad as a

 hornet, but shoot!  We can't afford the way our kids are breaking dishes."

      How touching, I thought as I wrapped them, for him to use her egg

 money, to buy her a gift that was going to make her mad.  My mind conjured

 up a lively scene of Mariah throwing the dishes at him until they were all

 chipped, and then the family eating off the hideous things the rest of

 their days.

      Another practical man bought a copper boiler for his wife's birthday.

 A copper boiler was an oval-shaped container  made to fit over two holes

 on the wood stove, to boil white clothes in  on wash day.  Lifting wet

 sheets out of the boiling lye water  with a stick was back breaking.  A

 copper boiler was a symbol of drudgery.  A very sentimental birthday gift.

 But it tickled me  when this man's wife bought him an axe for his birth-

 day so he could keep the wood chopped so she could keep her boiler bubbl-

 ing.

      Only local, homemade butter was sold in the store.  After the butter

 was churned, the excess buttermilk was worked out with a wooden paddle.

 The butter was then pressed into a mold , then unmoulded onto wet parch-

 ment  that was labled with the woman's name, and neatly wrapped.  When

 customers sorted through the stacks of butter in the store showcase, it

 was like judgment day.  Each woman  whose name  appeared on the wrapper

 was discussed, whether her kitchen was clean or not and whether she tied

 a bandana over her hair when she churned.  Some women wore crisp white

 aprons over their housedresses  when they delivered their butter.  They

 advertised their cleanliness,   demanded five-cents a pound more for

 their butter, and got it.

      Salley Jones * had the reputation of accumulating her cream until it

 reeked.  Once a month she'd bring fifteen pounds of butter to the store

 in her big water bucket.  Before the days of refrigeration, that was a

 lot.  Local customers wouldn't touch it, so naturally, we filled sheep-

 herder orders with it.  We got a note from one guy out on the Arizona

 Strip, saying that the butter we sent him was so strong he had to tie a

 rope around it to keep it in camp.

      Ether Wood hauled freight for Mr. Graff.  Once  when he took his

 brother Andrew with him, there was only half enough butter in their grub

 box to last for the trip.  So Ether told Andrew that Salley Jones had

 made the butter.  Andrew wouldn't touch it, and Ether enjoyed Myra Lemmon'^

 good sweet cream butter for the entire trip.

      Roving  gypsy bands occasionally came through Hurricane  in the summer-

 time.  People called them dirty horse-traders and thieves, but to me they
were venturesome, carefree and happy.  The women, in their bright scarves
and swirling skirts, were beautiful.
"Not h@e real name
-97-


         It was a midday in June.  Walter Eagar, Amelia and Jessie Webb .

 three of the clerks, had gone home for lunch, when the gypsies arrived.

 Mr. .Graff and Ruby Ruesch were in the back, marking a shipment of new shoes.

 I was alone in the front part of the store  when I saw the gypsies scatter.

 A dark-eyed girl came swiftly through the door and behind the counter where

 I was dusting.

      "If you'll cross my palm with silver, I'll tell your fortune."

      "I'm sorry, but I can't do that," I said uneasily.  I knew the red

 folds of silk that covered her were for more than color.  I backed away,

 but she moved with me, her eyes riveted on mine  as she kept talking.

 She was young, and very pretty.  I was both fascinated and frightened.

 It seemed silly to yell for help, but I wished someone --just anyone,

 would come into the store.

      The girl backed me past a small showcase on top of the counter  that

 had the glass door slid open.  Our cash register, a tall, fancy, chrome be-

 decked  four-drawer one, was under repair, and all of the drawers were

 conspicuously open and empty.  In a shoe box, along with the cosmetics in

 the open showcase, was the currency, silver and checks.

      "Cross my palm with just one piece of silver.  There are wonderful

 things in store for you," she said, her face upturned to mine.

      Just then, Mr. Graff materialized, and the gypsy fled.  Reaching

 for the shoe box, he found the currency gone.  He ran out the front door

 just in time to see the other gypsies help the girl into the back of

 their rams hackle truck, which went wheezing down the road.  Quickly, he

 summoned Tom Isom, the 'town marshal , and a posse of men were gathered,

 who followed in hot pursuit.

      The only way out of town was the road going down around the Sulphur
Springs.  It was not a swift road for a fleeing band in a rattle-trap
truck.  The posse blocked their way before they crossed the river.  In
their swift little visit, the gypsies had looted every business house in
town.  The marshal  and his men relieved them of their merchandise and
money, and ordered them never to set foot in Hurricane again.

     In a council with his clerks, Mr. Graff firmly told us to shout
alarm if ever another gypsy  came into the store.  But the band that fled
from Hurricane that day  seemed to be the last of a vanishing race.

     One day  Mr. Graff said, "Alice, why don't you take my car and run
after the mail?"

     I had just finished cutting off a slab of bacon for John Sanders.

      "I think I'll go with you," John said.  "I want to go to Will Sulli-
van's,so while you're out, maybe you can drop me off at his place."

     Neither Mr. Graff  nor John knew I had only been behind a steering
wheel once.  I got into the little sports roadster, and John settled down
beside me.  Smartly turning around in the back yard, without knocking over
the trash can, I came out onto the road.  While I tried to recall what
Orval Judd had said about stopping the car, the Post Office appeared.
Driving alongside, I knocked out a fence post, and the wire mesh stopped
us.

     John was out of the car like he had been rocket-propelled.  "Never
mind about taking me to Will's," he said, "I'll walk."  He didn't even
call for his mail.

                                   -98-

      I might as well have taken him to Sullivan's.  I drove back to the
store perfectly fine.

     Jessie was more experienced at clerking than the rest of us, except

 for Walter.  She knew everything  from the size of horse-shoe nails, to
how much cloth it took to make a dress for a six year old.  When women
asked for ideas for making a dress, without hesitation, she'd assemble
material on the counter.

      "I think this cloth would be pretty, with these little buttons down
here, and ribbon and lace around here," etc., designing the dress  right
before their eyes.  They always bought what she put before them.

      One day, when I answered the phone, it was Emma Bradshaw.  "Alice,"
she said, "I want to tie off a comforter this afternoon.  Ira is on his
way to the store now.  Please pick out ten yards of your prettiest cre-
tonne, and send it home with him."

      "Jessie," I called, hanging up the phone, "your Aunt Emma wants you
to pick out ten yards of cretonne for her."

     Mr. Graff overheard me.  With a hand on each of my shoulders, he
asked, "Who did Mrs. Bradshaw ask to pick out that cloth?"

      Ducking my head, I replied, "Me."

      "All right.  Now go and pick it out."

      "But I don't know what she will think is pretty."

      "Go right now and look at that cretonne.  Decide for yourself which is
the prettiest piece, and cut ten yards off from it.  Jessie's choice isn't
one bit better than yours."

     I'd never thought of that.  Amazed, I looked at the bolts of flowered
material.  They were all pretty, but one piece in particular was much the
prettiest.  Taking it down, I measured it off, and just got it wrapped  as
Ira came in the door.

     A short while later, the phone rang again and I answered it.  "Alice,
this is Emma.  I want to thank you for your picking out such pretty material.
It is exactly what I wanted."  How pleased I was!

     Mr. Graft's home was in LaVerkin, so Walter kept an extra set of keys
to the store  in case of emergencies.  The store carried patent medicines,
and every once in awhile, he had to open up in the night for a child
choked up with croup, or for some other ailment.  Going into the store at
night was spooky, because the place was dark.

     It was just my luck, the one time Walter left the keys with me,  I
had to do a lot worse than go after medicine.  Mr. Lewis, who was renting
the two north rooms in our house, died.  The sad weeping of his children,
who were at his bedside, awoke me.  The family realized they had better
travel as far as they could  in the cool of the night, to get him to his
old home town for the funeral, so they got me up to go after his casket.

     If ever I pretended to be brave, it was then.  To go into the far
end of the dungeon where the caskets were, was one thing I never did.
Just the sight of the dusty, pine boxes, conjured up in my mind  my child-
hood imaginings of the ten caskets of beans in our cellar.

                                     -99-

      Two of Mr. Lewis's sons went with me, and with a dim flashlight, I

 found the light switch  inside the back door.  The wooden steps creaked as

 we went into the basement.  When I put my hand out to steady myself, the

 cement wall was damp and cold.  I had seen the black widows suspended

 above their egg balls on the beams overhead, and imagined spider webs en-

 tangling me as I descended.  In the dim light, at the far end of the base-

 ment, the men selected the casket they needed, and we found help in getting

 it out.  This incident was merely a dress rehearsal for the one that was to

 follow.

      Soon after that, one of our neighbors died.  In those days, deceased

 loved ones were not rushed to a mortuary, but were "laid out" by the

 Relief Society sisters.  Ice was brought from the meat market and packed

 in fruit jars all around our neighbor to keep her cool until the funeral.

 She^had been washed and dressed in a pretty white dress, and her hair done

 up in a bun on top of her head.  I was asked to sit with her from ten at

 night, until two a.m.

      "Why sit up with someone who is dead?"  I asked. "Mattie? isn't qoinq

 anywhere is she?"

      "There have been cases when people were only thought to be dead. If

 they gasp for breath, they may need help." Horrified, I looked at the

 complacent sister who supplied this information.  "Then of course, we have

 to watch for cats," she continued.  I groaned.  "You don't have to worry.

 You won't be alone.  Her grandson Elmer will sit with you."

      Now that was just great! Elmer*was one of the ruffians with the corn-

 cob pipe, that had beat up on our sixth grade teacher, and he was always

 soused.

      When I talked to Mama about sitting with the dead, she said, "It is

 simply a nice and considerate thing to do.  The family will rest better

 knowing you are there."

      Mattie's bedroom windows were open, and the sheer curtains softly

 billowed out into the room.  She lay very still under a white sheet, and

 an electric fan droned, vacillating back and forth, at the head of the bed
The breeze from the fan kept lifting the sheet from her hair, until

 finally a lock, the size and shape of the tip of a cat's tail, unwound.
It waved back and forth, back and forth with the fan.  I watched, until I

 could stand it no longer.  I got up and went out on the front porch, where
Elmer had passed out, dead drunk, in the casket box.  Every time he moved,
his heavy shoes clanked against the pine boards  with a hollow sound.

      Hot as the night was, I was getting chilled from the melancholy drone
of the fan, and Elmer's mumbling, groaning and clattering in the casket
box.  Suddenly a terrible yowling and shattering of glass  brought me to
my feet in terror.

      "Elmer, Elmer, wake up," I cried hysterically, shaking him.

     Groggily he arose.  "Whassa matter?"

      "Something has happened in there," I choked, pointing inside.

     I didn't move  until he went with me.  Switching on the basement liahts,
we saw broken bits of fruit jars strewn down the cement steps.  They had"
been knocked from the ledge above the steps, where they had been stored.

 -Not their real names.

                        -100-

     "Blithering cats," Elmer grunted.

     Where they came from, or where they went to, I didn't know.  Wild

  horses couldn't have dragged me into the basement to find out0  I was re-

  ixeved and happy when two women came to replace me, and I could go ^me!"

 upstaS^I^frS^1^117 ^ onlyone t0 occupy the ^^st bedroom

 o^wn.^inT^^^^^^^              ^; ^ -^g

            ^a^^^^^^^^

 ^psSS ^ne ^^^n^ ob^ou? ?

 ^Y^^^

 I^ad^ugh? ^m Sat?. s31^ polished table with ^cy^S fogs, that

 LBsr^F^is^^^^^^^

 new mo»n toy, or the «g.zine pictures on Sy"e<S ^lT  °f sul°"er• lifce

 fl^'TSeAT^e 2u": r-? tatch in nly ^^^ that needed

 ^^^^si^^gs^s'
^^n^^I/S^he^-l^ ttlt£ ^^ ^———
so - - „ science s^e/to^en0^1':^^""'.^ S^r s0 -
he.ped'Se:1^ ^^"Thu^ie^ ^ any°ne we brought horo' a»d
^ys';
^ »,- „-. »'S.°^,; S",?£,~J-S^;,-.'S^-; £

                                    -101-

      "It just needed a little tuning up," he said.

     Just as he leaned back in his chair to visit, Wayne came in and sat on
my bed, making a nest in the sagging mattress  that I had patted out so
carefully.  I could tell by his sunburned grin, that showed his front teeth
that were too big for his face, that he was settled down to stay.  No way
could I have a heart-to-heart talk with this magnificent man  with this
little pest around, so there was nothing left to do  but thank him for
coming, and lead him back downstairs.

     Graciously he said goodnight to the family.  Then came the explosion.
"It is disgraceful, sinful, and immoral  to take a strange man to your
bedroom," Papa shouted, his face a livid red.

      "There is nothing wrong with taking a repairman to fix my typewriter,"
I hotly defended.

      "I want it understood that when your typewriter needs fixing, you will
do it downstairs on this table."

      "You know I can't lug that heavy thing down the stairs," I protested.

      "You've done it plenty of times," he reminded me.

      "But the family was eating supper."

      "That doesn't make any difference.  He could sit on the lounge and
wait until we cleared a place."

     Oh sure, sure.  I could see it all - - what with Papa bombarding him
about his morals and religion.

      "Only a cheap, loose woman would take a man to her bedroom," he stormed.

      "Papa!" I burst into tears.

      "This is what Isaiah meant when he talked about the daughters of Zion,"
he continued, and I knew exactly what he was going to quote.

     I ran to my room and plopped onto my face, crying a puddle of tears on
Grandmother's crazy-patch quilt.  How could a family be so unimaginative and
lacking in understanding 1  Not one of them knew the least thing about how a
girl felt.

     Softly, Mama came into my room and put her arms around me.  "You'd
better come and get some supper. Patsy," she said.

      "I don't want any," I blubbered.

      "Don't feel so bad," she coaxed.  "Your father is right.  There are so
many things that will look differently to you later on.  Come on down and
be with the family."

     I began to feel that Mama did understand.  I knew I had to face the
family, so I went down with her.

     Penitently, Papa said, "I'm sorry I was so harsh."  Tears stood in his
eyes.  "It is because we love you, and we know you are too innocent," he
explained.

     The next day, when the salesman returned to talk to Mr. Graff, I got so
busy with customers  that I didn't have to face him.

                                   -102-

     A certain customer, who always bought laundry soap, really turned my
generator on  when he entered the store.  Even if I was fitting boots on
the Prince of Wales, I think I would have left him in the shoe room  if
Winferd Gubler appeared.  But about all the response I ever got from
Winferd  was his money when he paid for the soap.  The rest of the clerks
knew I had a crush on him, so they left him for me to wait on.

     Winferd managed the swimming pool at the LaVerkin Hot Springs.  The
soap was to launder the towels and swim suits.  I figured if he ever dated
a girl  she would have to be a princess, so the most I could hope for  was
his smile as I bagged up his Fels-Naptha and Crystal White soap.

     My dating, for most of the summer, was "gang" dating, which took us
often to the swimming pool.  I couldn't swim, but usually sat on the steps
dangling my feet in the water.  Sometimes, I sat on a bench, and if Win-
ferd wasn't busy, he sat and visited with me.

     One evening, just before I left for college, he said, "Alice, you're
too nice a girl to be running around with this kind of company.  You're

 cheapening yourself, so that the right kind of fellow wouldn't want to

 date you."

     Stunned, I looked at him.  He^ was the one I'd rather date than anyone
in the world, but he never condescended to ask mei  The kids in the gang
always came for me.  There was nothing wrong with them, except they had a
bottle once in awhile. But they knew better than to offer it to me.

      "How kind of you, Mr. Alligator," I retorted.

      "Alice, I mean it," he said earnestly.  "Don't sell yourself short."

     I could see that he did mean it, and somehow I wasn't angry with him.
But now, summer was over, and the gang split up.  I never saw them again.

     Ah College!  The Grand Old BAC1  Kate was the Fairy Godmother who •
whisked me there.  For the first two weeks, we stayed with Aunt Evadna and
Uncle John Hopkins.  I planned to become a fine School Teacher, and words
of praise would dribble back to Mama and Papa about me, like they did
about Kate.  But Uncle John changed that.

     "Alice, don't register for normal training," he said.  "There are too
many old-maid school teachers already.  You may not even be able to get a
contract. And even if you do, you'll spend your life teaching your school
mates' little kids.  That's no way to catch a husband.  Go into business
where you'll be working with adults."

     He made sense, so I changed my course on registration day.  The day
before, Kate took me to Henry Berkstrom's exclusive shop, where she bought
me an entire wardrobe of beautiful, beautiful dresses.  The fabrics were
rich and the tailoring superb.  Transformed, I was as sharp looking as any
co-ed on campus.  I blossomed under the touch of her magic wand.

     One thing was lacking.  I was not transformed into a divine dancer.
I was something less than Cinderella  at the registration dance.  But the
Prince was there, in person of Lyie Thomas, the best looking, curly-headed
football player at the BAC.  As I entered, clipping along in my smart,
patent leather slippers, elegant dress, and soft windblown hairdo, he saw
me.  With the first strains of music, he grandly glided, swirling and

                                  -103-
bowing, the full length of the mirror-bright floor, swooping me off my
feet.  Literally off my feet!  Stark terror gripped me, and the room spun.
When Lyie almost stumbled with the frozen icicle (me) in his arms, he
hastily returned me to my seat.  He never looked at me again.  The miracle
of the incident is that I didn't run home crying.  I stayed and watched
all evening.  Self-consciousness turned to indignation.  I resolved to
leam to dance.

     For the next two weeks. Cedar City lay shivering under wet, black
clouds.  New clothes, the college campus, school activities— nothing,
could stay the longing for home that built up inside of me.  All I could
think of  was how nice and sunny it must be at home.  I developed a tooth-
ache and needed to see old Doc Gibson.  That was reason enough to go home.

     Saturday morning, I walked down Cedar Main» with my little suitcase.
I couldn't find a soul from home.  At Petty Motors I inquired, "Do you
happen to have a car going to Hurricane?"

     "Can you drive?" Charlie Petty asked.

     "Oh yes," I answered.  I was homesick enough to drive anything going
my way.

                             -te                         *

     "I've just sold a car to Chester and Albert, and they don't drive.
Can you chauffeur them?"

     "I sure can," I replied.

     Chester and Albert were timid bachelors from Rockville.

     Looking at the shiny cars, I asked, "Which one is yours?"

     "Ours is out back," Chester answered, and I followed him into the
garage.

     A mechanic was under the hood.  Slamming it down as we approached,
he said, "Your little jewel is ready for the road."

     At my startled look, Albert said, "We got it for twenty-five dollars.
We ain't goin' to drive anywhere only around in the field."

     The car was a faded blue.  The interior resembled a mouse's nest with
cotton oozing from splits in the upholstery.  I was thankful the mechanic
backed it out of the garage, because I'd never driven in reverse.

      "Are you ready?" I asked.

      "Yep," Chester replied, getting into the front seat.

     I slid under the steering wheel and Albert got in the back. I pushed

 the starter button, the car coughed and puffed a cloud of black smoke, I

 put it in gear, and we chugged out of town.  Every time I gave it the gas,

 the car shimmied, so I eased it down to a crawl.  It was better for me, for

 I still wasn't used to steering.

      Except for the rumble of the motor, we traveled in silence.  I looked

 at Chester.  He had gone rigid, with his back stiffened against the seat,

 his feet pushing against the floorboard, and his eyes glued to the road.

 When I turned to see how Albert was, he made a startled, choking sound, and

 sat up tall, to watch the road while I looked at him.  I couldn't see why

 they were so scared.  There was no speedometer, but we couldn't possibly

 ^ Not their real names.

                                    -104-

  have been doing twenty-five miles per hour.  If we had gone faster, the car

  would have been shaken to pieces.

      Well, if they wanted to go into a coma, that was up to them, but this

 was my first time  driving on the open road, and I was going to enjoy it.

 My tooth didn't ache anymore  because I was going home.  Happily I hummed

  "Mid pleasures and palaces," and the little car jerked and twitched over

 the Black Ridge, out of the clouds, and down into the sunshine of our little

 corner of the earth.  I knew Albert and Chester were still breathing, for

 occasionally I heard one or the other gasp.

      A new road was under construction between Toquerville and LaVerkin

 and I almost missed the right-angle turn.  When my eye caught the detour

 I made it so sudden and sharp  that it took the car a few feet to get   '

 back on all fours.  I had planned on driving clear home, but at the take-

 off to Rockville, Chester said,"You'd better stop here."

      "Stop?" I asked.

      "Yes.  We don't want to go no further.  You get out and we'll take the

 car home."

      Well I  Talk about appreciation, after all I'd brought them through.

 I was still four miles from home!

      Mr. Graff came along and stopped  just as Albert set my suitcase by

 the side of the road.  For the first time, those old bachelors came alive.

 I had thought they were dead to any feeling, but with me out of their car

 they radiated.  Enthusiastically they thanked me, over and over, for bring-

 ing them this far.  Mr. Graff whisked me off for home.  As I looked back

 Albert and Chester were waving goodbye.                                 '

      Monday morning. Ether Wood brought me bade to school.  Ether freighted

 for Mr. Graff, and waited on all of the college students from Hurricane.

 He transported them, and brought packages from their mothers, cheerfully

 ed to^^h'  (He f^? papafs coa1 bin without ^ and ^Y3 ^~

 ed to see if there was bottled fruit to be sent to us.)

      Our apartment  in the Will Simpkins home  was ready, and we moved in

 ^ ourcous;Lns' Lula and LaVerna Heaton.  Their brother Freddie  lived

 with Aunt Kate and Uncle Will Palmer.  Freddie and his friend, Lovell

 used to visit us.  Since we were all duds at dancing, we set up a class

 m our living room.  Day after day, we danced to the'music of LuLT

 phonograph, until we gained confidence enough to tackle the school dances.

      "Ifs fuming, that gets me out of step," Freddie confessed.  "The

 easiest way  is to bump into someone at each corner of the room, then
turn my partner while I'm already out of step."
w^ ^i^91^ ^at asch001 socia1' I was dancing with Lovell. The floor
was slick, and he slipped.  Afraid we'd both go down, I let go of him, and
^whe felT,        I felt s0 terribly sorry) because T knew exactly
^soc±alprestigl30n campus came with membership in a sorority or frat-
ernity. ^Initiation into these clubs was one of the high-lights to a

 freshie .  Initiations ranged from the dangerous to the ridiculous.  The
Nu Onega Rho Sorority made a bid for me.  For the three weeks of my init-
iation, I carried a brick with "goat" written on it.  The brick was heavy,
but I was never to lay it down.  Each day at school, one of my "superiors"

                                  -105-

 made a goat out of me.  One day I had to wear my graduation dress to school,

 along with a pair of knee-high  hiking boots, and an alarm clock dangling

 around my neck.  The alarm went off during English class, and Mr. Hayward

 said, "Alice, you may leave the room."  So with rhinestones flashing, pink

 georgette fluttering and heavy boots clopping, I made my"inconspicious"exit.

 Always, we had to do the mortifying thing requested of us, for we were

 spied upon by our "superiors",

      All of the Nu Omega Rho. "goats" had to plead poverty, and beg their

 way into the movie.  We were humiliated and ridiculed by the manager, but

 finally admitted.  (Our tickets had previously been paid for.)  Lorna

 Lowe and I had to order a meal at Lunt's Cafe, then slip out without pay-

 ing.  We were grabbed, and sent to the kitchen to do dishes.  We knew this

 was rigged, because they had saved up mountains of dirty dishes.  We washed

 all afternoon.

      After three weeks of embarrassing, humiliating experiences, we were

 taken to our final court at midnight, blindfolded, and led into a dark

 room.  We were pushed from upper-story windows, burned with red hot pokers

 and fed gritty, raw oysters.  All of this was phony, except the oysters.

 The power of suggestion was supposed to make us feel we were falling  when

 we were caught in a net, and ice was supposed to feel red-hot. It was a

 disappointment, because things seemed like what they really were.

      But I became a sworn-in Nu Omega Rho., and was given a red  silk

 handkerchief, with the insigne in the corner.  This was my first (and last)

 step up the social ladder.  I was too blithe a spirit to be a good Nu

 Omega Rho .  Sophistication bored me.

      To gain prestige, the Omegas made a grand splash for Mrs. Jade Londor

 when she came to town.  They fixed up the college social hall, renting an '

 upholstered set from Hunter Hardware, along with a crystal punch bowl and

 other dishes, a polished table and lace cover.  They bought "frappe".  an

 exciting new frozen dessert, and cakes.  Mrs. London graciously spent an

 hour with us.  The party cost each club member $5.00 apiece, at a tine

 when bread was 5<£ a loaf!  Mrs. London never did get her husband to dedi-

 cate a book to us, and even after the financial drain, which hurt  we

 scarcely made the news.

   _  The college kept an honor roll posted in the front entrance of Old
ham.  I was surprised when I saw my name next to the top.  That challenged
me.  Why not get it on the very top?  I dug in and made it, but keeoing it
there was something else.  I kept my name on the honor roll all year  but
the top spot was shared.

     My one diversion  from the heavy courses I took, was an art class from
Bastow.  To help pay expenses, I worked in the combined Creamery and Book
Store a couple of hours each afternoon, under Hazen Cooley.  Mv homesid-
ness had vanished.                                              "

     When we went home for Thanksgiving, I slept with LaPriel.  Thanksqivinq
morning, LaPriel awoke with the mumps!                               "^giving

     Back at school, I enrolled in a dancing class under Ballenfcyre.  Joy-
ously, I looked forward to the Christinas dance at home.  I had a strong pre-
monition  that Winferd Gubler would really see me for the first time.  Of
all the guys on the college campus, there was no^ one to compare with Win-

                                     -106-

      Christmas morning, ^ awoke with the mumps!  Fat  and ugly.  I was too

 sick to join the family downstairs, and too sick to care.  Late that night

 Edith came home giggling.  She had been out with that funny Winferd Gubler'

 Funny?  There was nothing funny about it to me.  It was tragic!  I would

 have given the world to be with him.  Now, I was really sick.  Sick with

 total frustration!

      I spent the entire holidays in bed, barely getting over the mumps in

 txme to return to school.  I had lost fifteen pounds.

  ^   At quarterly conference held in December, the St. George Stake was

 divided, and the Zion Park Stake was organized, with Claude Hirschi as

 Stake President, and James Judd and Russell Swenson as counselors.

                                CHAPTER 19

                             So Turns The Tide

                                  (1930)

      Across the room from me in English class  sat the most collegiate look-

 ing boy on campus.  The name that fit him most was "BAC".  From the corner

 of my eye, I often saw him looking at me.  When I returned his glance, he

 smiled.

      "What's the lettering on your pep sweater?" he asked one day.

      He knew it was my initials, but I made the roost of it.  "It's A-l.

 I am an A-l co-ed."

      Grinning,he said, "I've been noticing you for a long time, and that's

 exactly what I've decided you are."

      That was the beginning of a romance that made me forget Winferd.

 "BAC" and I went to the college functions and movies together.  I little

 realized a fellow could be so considerate and nice and still be so much fun.

      Cedar City had been blanketed with snow and ice all winter, and when
Mama's letter came  saying the peach trees were in bloom, I persuaded "BAC"

 to go with me and see.  His sister and her girl friend came with us.  After

 we dropped down from the Black Ridge into Utah's Dixie, we were in another
world.  Toquerville, LaVerkin and Hurricane were mostly orchards, envelop-
ing the little towns.  What a garden of Paradise they were!  My college

 friends, who had never seen springtime in Dixie, marveled at the beautv of
it, and I felt so proud of my "homeland".

     We visited with the family and enjoyed their hospitality and Mama's
good dinner, then went to Papa's field  into the pink world of peach
blossoms.  Bees hummed in every tree, and meadowlarks filled the air with
their melody.  The sun was golden and warm.  If ever I loved Hurricane  it
was that day.  We gathered arm loads of flowers to take back to Cedar '
Looking back across the years, that day still stands out as the most '
blossom-filled, music-filled, sunshine-filled, "I love life" day that I can
recall.                                                           -

     That day, "BAC" made a date with me for the prom.  My feet almost
skipped to campus and back in the days that followed.  And then the collece
students went to the LaVerkin Hot Springs on a swimming party.  The manager

                                    -107-

 of the resort was the last thing on my mind.  As I entered the building with

 "BAC", Winferd Gubler saw me --really saw me for the first time.

      Managing to get me aside, he asked,"How about a date for the colleae

 pro?-!?"

      What an exasperating moment.  A year ago, if he had asked me for a

 date, I would have accepted so eagerly that it would have frightened him

 away.  But now, I was simply annoyed.  "I'm sorry," I answered.  "I already

 have a date."

      Unabashed, he asked, "If I come to the prom, will you get me a date?"

      "Sure," I replied.

      Mary was just his type —intellectual, and pretty too.  They'd make a

 perfect match.  Mary was thrilled,and bought an expensive formal, and

 arrangements were made for Winferd to call at her home.

      I got my first floor-length formal, and "BAC" gave me the first corsage

 I ever wore  -- pink rose buds. (I pressed the roses in "The Last Days of

 Pompeii" where they remained for years.)  The dance was dreamy, until I saw

 Mary make a late entrance, accompanied by her parents.

      "Where is Winferd?" I asked.

      "He didn't come," she answered.  Her eyes were red from weeping.

      I was furious!  That bounder!  Here I had played him up to Mary for a
big hero, and he had let her down.

     Much later, he arrived, full of apologies and explanations about car
trouble.  Mary danced with him, but refused to let him take her home.

     My college romance lasted through the summer, even though "BAC's"
visits were infrequent.  Papa set his heart on him the same as he had
done with Maurice Judd.  So far as Papa was concerned, I had arrived.  Win-

 ferd looked at it differently.

     I was back in the store clerking for Mr. Graff, and Winferd made more
ticky trips for laundry soap than he'd ever done before.  He knew I was
dating someone else, and this sparked his interest in me.

     One afternoon, it took him an hour to buy four bars of Pels Naptha.
To keep busy  after I had bagged the soap, I dusted a pencil display rack
over and over, taking every one of the one-hundred and fourty-four pencils
out of the little holes individually, and polishing around them.  Finally
after Winferd left, Mr. Graff appeared.

     "Well, did you get a date?" he asked.

     "Yes," I replied.

     "I have a vacant lot between my store in LaVerkin  and Gubler's
house.  It is a fine building spot," he grinned.

     It was the enchanted hour between daylight and dark  when Winferd's
green Chevrolet drove away from our gate.  I was the girl sitting beside
him.  Once, I would have felt as breathless as though riding on a magic
carpet, but things were different now.  Winferd was no longer the great,
unreachable prince.

                                   -108-

      I had been warned that heart-smashing was his game.  Certainly, he was

 different from anyone I had ever been with.  He was suave and polished, with

 a maturity that made all other dates seem juvenile, still he had a spontan-

 eous good humor that was as refreshing as a breeze.

      We stopped to enjoy the last pink and gold that solashed the sky in

 the west.  "I love the twilight," he said, "it is my favorite time of day."

      We watched the jagged silhouette of the mountains blend into night, as

 the car climbed the Rockville hill.  By the time we reached the summit, the

 stars were out.  He showed me how to locate the North Star in relation to

 the big dipper.

      "That is the North Star," he said pointing.  To make sure I was seeing

 the right one, he put an arm across my shoulder.  I felt a warm radiance at

 his touch.

      He drove around the loop from the Rockville hill, down the Hurricane

 dugway, and home.  Taking me to the door, he kissed me lightly on the tip

 of my ear, said,"Goodnight," and was gone.

      Something had happened to me.  I thought I had lost all interest in

 Winferd, but I discovered it was not so.  Papa sensed it too, and was con-

 cerned.

      "I wish you wouldn't go with Winferd," he said.  "You'll never find a

 better man than 'BACi"

      "I know I won't. Papa.  But you don't need to worry.  A girl doesn't

 marry every fellow she goes with."

      "And she never marries a fellow she doesn't go with," he replied.

      My heart was troubled.

      In the evenings, after the day's work was through, I sometimes wander-

 ed through the trees, and down into the lucern patch.  I had so much think-

 ing to do.  Instinctively  I knew that the house I had grown up in  would
no longer be my home after I returned to college in the fall.  Perhaps i^-
would be a career that would take me away, or perhaps - - - .

     I thought of my visit to the dentist last week.  Old Doc Gibson had
taken it upon himself to counsel me.

      "Oh little chick," he said, "eventually you will venture forth upon the
sea of matrimony.  But you will never. I repeat never have children   Re-
member, you must not have children."            ———
...   I didntt bothe1- t" ask why.  He filled my tooth, I paid him and left,
thinking he was weird.  And then, of all things, as I walked home from work
the following evening, Sister Wood called from her porch.

     "Alice, come in and visit with me for a few minutes."

     As I sat with her on her porch, she gave me the same counsel.  Was this
some kind of conspiracy?  Why shouldn't I have children"" sister Wood didn't
say, but as an afterthought , she added, "Of course, the millenium could
come soon.  In that case, your children would be all right."

     Then the thunderbolt struck, when a Santa Clara Dutchman, who had dated
almost every girl in town, decided it was my turn.  He relaxed in our front

                                    -109-

 room, visiting my parents.  Singing was his favorite pastime, and Mama and

 Papa were good listeners.  They requested one old-time song after another,

 and he seemed to know them all.  Finally, he asked me to go for a stroll.

 Walking in the summer evening was pleasant.

      After visiting for awhile, he finally said,"I'd marry you, I'd marry

 you in a minute, if it wasn't for that Parker blood."

      Well!  Whatever made him think I'd marry him?

      "What about that Parker blood?" I asked.

      "All of your children will be crippled, like your father," he replied.

      "How do you know?" I asked.

      "Don't you know?" he quizzed.

      "No I don't."

      "Well, everybody else does.  That's why the boys in Hurricane don't

 date any of you.  Their parents have all forbid them too.  Your father has

 a hereditary disease, and no one wants to marry into it."

      I simply didn't believe ill

      "Thanks for telling me," I retorted.  "And to think, I had planned all

 along on asking you to marry mel"

      How strange.  My father's condition had never been discussed in our

 home.  He was crippled as far back as I could remember, and it had never

 occurred to me to ask why.  He was just our father, and that's how he was.

 No one, absolutely no one, had ever said one thing about it to me before

 When I asked Mama if what our Dutchman friend had said was true, she said

 it was, but not a^_ of my children would be crippled, but perhaps some of

 them would.  Wayne was the only one  out of her eleven  that showed any

 signs.                                                                      -

      Oh my, what a lot I had to think about as I walked in the lucern patch
in the twilight.  But for some reason, after the first shock, I did not feel

 despair.  The breeze, the first dim stars, the sleepy twitter in the branches

  T"^?' allsp0  peace t0 me- z could onlv be fateful that my mother
and father had had me and all of my brothers and sisters, because they were
my favorite people, and our home had been happy and good.  I thouch^- of all
S^ T^6 1 ?^ wh0 were afflicted like ^ ^ther, and they were highly
intellectual, and they were good, and I knew the Lord loved them.  Happiness
was inherent.  My heart could not be burdened.  If other folks wanted to
worry about us, let them.  Then I stopped.  Oh, those poor troubled people.
Of course they would worry.  I myself wouldn't want my children to marry into
innnnitles.

  _  Going toward the house, I met Mama coming down the walk.  "Mama " I
said, "I've been wondering what made you decide to marry Papa when you were
young.  Did you know what you were doing?"

     She smiled.  "Yes, I knew full well.  I thought it through thoroughly
i nave never regretted my choice, because I love your father, and am grate-
ful to have such a fine, eternal companion."

                                   -110-

      My summer clerking proved to be one of the most interesting assignments

 I had known.  Mr. Graff had a small chain of stores and gas pumps, and I was

 his vacation-relief clerk.  When Alvin Hardy, who managed his Springdale

 store, took his family on vacation, Mr. Graff sent me there.  I stayed with

 my cousins. Nancy and Squire Crawford, who were precious and dear to me.

      One week-end while there, Winferd came to take me to an Indian cave at

 Antelope.  Some years before, when he was there herding sheep, he chased a

 rabbit, that disappeared into a hole.  To Winferd«s astonishment, the slant-

 ing rays of the sun penetrated the hole, revealing an underground chasm.

      He eased down through the hole, and found himself in an auditorium-

 sized Indian storehouse.  Along the rock shelves were rows of moccasins,

 pottery and grinding stones.  Feverish with excitement, he gathered a

 number of specimens.  Later, he took a collection to the B.A.C. and one to

 the B.Y.U.  Both colleges gave him scholarships for the Indian artifacts.

      Time had elapsed and Winferd had not returned to the spot until this

 particular day.  Winter storms had taken their toll, and the roof of the

 chasm that had held for ages, had partly collapsed.  Winferd was terribly

 disappointed.  Together we walked inside.  Overhead, lime had oozed in

 giant curlicues on the ceiling, like tooth paste out of a tube.  Winferd

 explained that the pressure of the rain soaked earth, as it settled, had

 caused this.  Tons of earth had covered the rock shelves, but still exposed

 were many Indian treasures.  We brought home a man's, size thirteen  neSp

 ^tTe'brave'who' wore"^3 the print of every toe) and the ba11 of the foot

 whilst Alvir; y"^ returned' Mr- Graff sent ^ to run the store in Leeds

 while Walter and Jessie Eagar went on vacation.  One morning, just after I

 He?n?" T6? T   ?^ ^ town drunk ^g^d i" ^ clutched on to me.

 5S n^ Y^  gg ? t0 get free- Then t0 my c?reat relief' a deaf-mute by

 ed h;^ ? ^orace    rst in-  He grabbed the drunk by fche c011^ ^ Pitch^

 ed him out the door.  For the rest of the two weeks, Horace took up guard

 duty  staying with me during store hours.  Before Jessie and Walter SSt

 hiT^sToooT" wmwatch out for y- ^'t -rry Imi'nut e about

 In a"^       g    as gold-   And he was-  He ^^ and ^sted and helped

 in countless ways.  He was truly a guardian angel,                   "e^pea

 mind ^uS ooSLh^T F^ dlfferentt  He alwa^ had something special in

 S ^he back^ea?o^h?      an^phonograph  and book of records  rode B^d

 in the back seat of his car.  The Zion Tunnel  at that time  was an invit-
ing place, with its rock finish interior and unrestricted paring space ±n
thew^ op? wlndows- N0 ce^lent-work inhibited the cars, and LSfIc was
light.  Sometimes in the early twilight, Winferd parked his Chevrolet ^n
d^?96^ wlndowof the ^""el, put waltz music on the phonograph6 and we
danced   When the light began to fade, we sat on the window lelge? looklna

  ^ ^ly o^^M K^S i^ -
^^^•l^-S^^T^. SS ^^^y feature- wln-
K«n«o?e"«°''Lr»<iancmg T the cdrrmt fad. a"1 "e danced at Hidden Lake
^T/^^^^^^^^^
beside hM.  since he belonged to no one, he seemed to belongt^e^Sone.

                                  -111-
And now, even on nights when he had a date with me, the girls who had been
used to inviting themselves to the open air dances  still piled into the
bade seat of his car.  Winferd was a gregarious fellow and seemed quite
happy when surrounded.  No doubt, this is how he had preserved his bachelor-
hood.  Dates with "BAC" were far more proper and normal.

     Papa's anxiety mounted.  "It isn't right for a girl to be dating first
one fellow, and then another," he lamented.

     "But Papa, what is a girl to do?  Blindly make up her mind who she is
in love with?  How can she make a right choice, if she only dates one
person?"

     "I think I know your heart far better than you do.  This Gubler man is
not the marrying kind.  You're wasting your time on him.  He's been around
too much.  Besides that, he's too old for you."

     Winferd was twelve and one-half years older than I.  And he had been
around, spending two years in Ohio on a mission for the Church , then
attending the B.Y.U., and working in the Eureka mines.  He and his mission-
ary companion. Dell Fairboume, had done a lot of double dating, managing
to keep themselves quite unentangled.

     Winferd's Aunt Josephine, who was our neighbor, warned my parents.
"Winferd will only break Alice's heart.  He goes with a girl until she falls
in love with him, then he drops her.  He will never marry."

     This caused even Mama, who had let Papa do all of the fretting, to
voice her concern.  Here I was, past my twentieth birthday, but feeling
helplessly confused as a child.  When Winferd asked if I could spend
Sunday with him at Kanab  with his Bowman relatives, I took my parent's
counsel, and turned him down.  My heart felt like a blob of lead.

     I went with Ervil Sanders instead  on a Stake Sunday School visit to
the Short-Creek, Canebeds Branch.  I was the newest board member.

     Throughout the week, my not-so-happy heart concerned Mama, so when
Winferd asked the following week if I could go to Bryce Canyon with him,
she helped pack the sandwiches, handed me my class sweater and said,
"Have a happy day."  How I loved her for that.

     Time passed swiftly, and soon I was back registering for school, and
back to my college romance.  Obedient to Papa's counsel, I had asked Win-
ferd not to see me anymore.  He wept.  The test was terrible.

     As he said goodbye, he handed me a phonograph record.  "I bought this
for you.  Will you accept it please?"

     Shaking my head I said, "I can't."

     "Please," he urged.  "It's the last thing I can do for you."

     I took it and shoved it on the back of a shelf.

     The secret of forgetting is to be busy.  Back at school, I was caught
up in the honor roll scramble, working with the year book staff, and clerk-
ing in the bookstore.  The fall quarter was over and my college romance had
left for the sheep herd.  Then one afternoon, I found myself alone at our
bachelor quarters.  Thoughts of Winferd overpowered me, so I dug out the
record he had given me, and played it.

                                   -112-

      Tenderly the strains of "Moonlight on the River Colorado" filled the

 room.  To me, the voice was Winferd's.  Once more I saw the light of the

 August rooon shimmering on the rippling waters of the Virgin River.  To-

 gether we stood on the bridge that spanned the narrows as he sang this

 song.  Tears coursed down my cheeks.  I knew in that moment  that the dear-

 est sound on earth was his voice.  Hastily I scribbled a note, "Please come

 back," and mailed it.

      The family told me that he had been moping around for weeks, and that

 no one could cheer him, that when he got my note he ran all the way home

 from the post office. (One-half block.)  Within two hours after he got my

 letter, he was knocking at our door.

      He registered for the winter quarter at the B.A.C.  When Ruby Ruesch

 and Roland Webb sent us an announcement that they were being married on

 December seventeenth, winferd said, "Why don't we surprise them and make

 it a double?"

      So Winferd Gubler, the heart-smasher, the confirmed bachelor, was

 actually proposing marriage!

      "How come you didn't get married years ago?" I asked.

      "You were too young," he replied.  "I had to wait for you to grow up."

      Monday and Tuesday we had tests to take at school.  It's odd that we

 were so conscientious we couldn't take time out to prepare for our wedding

 day.  We didn't even warn the folks.  Tuesday, after our last class, we

 came home and broke the news that we were going through the temple the next

      Exasperated, Mama said, "Don't you ever do a thing like that again!"

 ^  poor.MaIna•  she hurried among the relatives, borrowing temple clothing,

 an  ^^T^ "T/0^ while I went for an ^erview with Bishon Johnson

 We went to the Wednesday night temple session and were married in the east

 sealing room, R^by and Roland first, and then Winferd and I.  I wore KaS
Alien's dress.  The room was packed with friends and relatives.

     After the ceremony, Mama said, "I have but one piece of advice to aive

 you.  Don't ever let the sun go down on your wrath."                      g
Don.t^poThL^ said' "He has been raised on bread and milk f- -PP-
P^ "YT5 3:00!' m* before we got back t0 Winferd's dinky apartment in
mSsed ^nrda/oTs^or our 8:00 a- m- classes on Thursda^ ^
Graff^d01!1^ ^ut ^ the.holidays Frid^ "ignt, and I had promised Mr.
Sver^ TL^d^^oney.";^^^^^^               -

                gofng g^a we^
Ssssss-isisi^

               ^ S^ced

                                   -113-

     I clerked for Mr. Graff for five days, while our harrassed parents
pooled their efforts to prepare for our reception.  They made rows of pump-
kin pies and gallons of hand-cranked ice cream.  Winferd bought a keg of
fresh pressed concord juice from Clyde DeMille, and his orchestra friends
furnished the dance music as a gift to us.  The recreation hall in the
Hurricane school house  was packed.  The one thing that got the most comment
of all was the Concord juice.  Although it was fresh and sweet, it had de-
veloped a tantalizing zing, and even years afterward , we were occasionally
confronted with a grinning question such as, "Do you remember who served
wine at their reception?"

     Finally with Christmas and the reception over, we found an hour of our
own to be together.  In my mother's kitchen, I packed a lunch, then we
went picnicking in Grassy Valley, south of Hurricane.  Winferd ate and ate.
After he had slicked up the last crumb of Kama's fruitcake, he said, "The
sample was good.  When do we eat?"

     "We just did," I said.

     "We did?  I thought that was the appetizer.  I mean, when do we
really eat?"

     Oh no, I thought.  The guys were right I  Bill Sanders had asked,"How
are you going to feed the monster?" and Roland Webb had said, "He eats
like a horse."  Even his own mother remarked that Winferd really enjoyed
food.  I eyed him over with astonishment.

     Finally he burst into a .peal of laughter.  "Don't worry.  I'm
fuller than a hop-toad.  I couldn't eat another bite."

     It didn't take long to learn that during his bachelor  years, Winferd
had courted the favor of every woman in town by bragging about her cooking.
At ward parties, they heaped extra goodies on his plate, just to see his
enthusiasm.  He had built a reputation for himself.  He was the ward recre-
ation director, and he was the one who made the parties fun.

     We strolled through the lengthening shadows of the afternoon, this
actually being our first chance to talk  since we had conceived the mad-
cap idea of trying to beat Ruby and Roland to the altar.

     "Winferd, since you knew my family well, why did you marry into it?"
I asked.

     "Because we were mated in Heaven.  If it had not been so, I would have
married someone else years ago. Ifs like I told you, I had to wait for you
to grow up."

     Thoughtfully, I shook my head.  He was evading my question.  "Winferd,
why did you marry into our family?" I repeated.

     Taking my hand in his as we hiked through the chaparrels, he said,
"Alice, I thought a great deal about the problem.  I tried to ignore you,
but couldn't.  When I'asked Mother about marrying you, she said,'If you
love her, marry her.  We do not marry for this life only, but for
eternity.'"

     Oh, my precious mother-in-law!

                                  -114-

     We talked of many things, of ideals, hopes and plans, but one thing
special remains in my memory.  Winferd said, "During my bachelor years,
I've noticed one thing in particular about my married friends.  Too often
a husband makes his wife the butt of his jokes, especially at parties.  Or
he refers to her as 'the old battle axe*, or 'the ball-and-chain* f or per-
haps they will call one another 'the old man', or 'the old woman**   It
sounds disrespectful, and someone always ends up being hurt."

     I knew what he meant.  More than once I had seen a friend of mine
bristle, or sit silently on the verge of tears, while her husband roared
with laughter at her idiosyncrasies.

     "Let's promise that we'll never belittle one another in front of any-
one, " Winferd continued.

     This promise was easy for both of us to make, and we found it just as
easy to keep.

                               CHAPTER 20

                         Sing a Song of Six Pence

                                  (1931)

     With the holidays behind, I moved my belongings from our bachelor
quarters at Vergene Simpkins' home, to Winferd's dinky apartment.  Kate
had been a second mother to me for a year and a half of college, providing
the place to live and the groceries.  Kate had fussed over me, loved me,
and worried about me.  A lifetime of gratitude or good deeds on my part
could never repay her for all that she had meant to me.  Vergene's apart-
ment would be more serene without me, since there were still three school
teachers, Kate, Edna Heaton and Sylvia Jones  living there, and one
student, LaVema Heaton.  The extra closet space would be appreciated.

     Winferd took me to live in the basement laundry room that had been
his quarters since starting school.  He paid his rent by sweeping snow
and making fires for Amy Leigh.  The cubby-hole "apartment" was furnished
with two built in,cast iron,laundry tubs, hot and cold running water, and
assorted pipes, both large and small, that criss-crossed the ceiling.
Winferd had squeezed in his camp cot, folding table and chairs, and his
little gas stove.  And that was Home Sweet Home.

     Surveying our bridal suite, I said, "Shall we fix up the place?"

     "You're the lady of the house.  Where do we start?"

     "Let's put a broom stick across this  corner to hang our clothes
on, then we can get your shirts and pants down off those pipes.  We can
use a piece of cretonne for the closet door and to curtain the little
window."

     The transformation began.  An Indian blanket replaced the denim camp
quilt on the bed, and a bright flowered cloth covered the metal table.
Inspired, Winferd built a couple of shelves for books and dishes, and I
made a curtain for them too.

     "My, what a difference a woman and a piece of cretonne makes," he
grinned.
